The Tale of the Little Black Fish

IT WAS AN EVENING deep in midwinter. Way down at
the bottom of the sea an old fish had gathered around
all twelve thousand of her children and grandchildren.
She began to tell them a story:

"Once upon a time there was a little black fish who
lived in a stream with her mother. The stream sprang
from the rocky side of a mountain and flowed along
the bottom of a valley. Their home was behind a black
rock under a ceiling of moss and they would both
sleep there every night. The thing the little black fish
loved above all else was to see the moonlight shining

0n their house.

Every day, from morning until night, the little black
fish would swim about following her mother. Some-
times they would get caught up amongst other fish
dashing to and fro. She was an only child, being the
only healthy baby to have hatched from the twelve
thousand eggs her mother had laid.

Now, the little black fish had been thinking quietly to
herself for several days. She wandered about and
often got left behind by her mother, who thought she

was just a bit ill and would soon perk up. Very early
one morning matters came to a head when the little
black fish woke her mother and said,

"Mummy, I want to talk to you."

"What time d0 you call this? grumbled her mother,
who was still half asleep, "Leave it till later on.

Mummy, I can't stay here any longer, I must get
away! said the little black fish.

"Are you sure? asked her mother.
Yes she replied.

"Alright,  said the mother, who still hadn't caught on,
but where do you want to go so early in the morning?"

The little black fish started to explain, I want to go
and see where the stream ends. You see Mummy, I
have been thinking for a whole month about where
the end of the stream is. I havent been able to get it
out 0f my mind. All last night I couldn't shut my eyes
because I was thinking the whole time. In the end I
decided that I must go myself and see what lies there.
I really want to know what is going on in other
places....

Her mother laughed and said, l used to think a lot
like that when I was a child. Darling, the stream has
no beginning and no end and thats all there is to it. It
just flows on and on and doesnt lead anywhere.

"But, Mummy, isnt it true, she asked, "that everything has an end? The night has an end, the day has an
end, so has the week, the month and the year...."

"Stop all these great thoughts," her mother interrupted her, and come along. |ts no time to be chattering like this, we must go out.

"No, Mummy," insisted the little black fish, "lm fed
up with just swimming about. I want to go and see
what is happening in other places. You may think that
someone has given me these ideas, but Ive been
thinking about things myself for a long time. |ts true
that l have learnt some things from friends; for in-
stance, I know that when a lot of fish get old they
complain that they have achieved nothing and just
wasted their lives. They moan about everything all the
time. l want t0 know what it really means to live: It
can't just be to come and go in the same old way and
never do anything else until one gets old; there must
be more to life than this in the world!

When she had finished this outburst her mother said,
My dear little girl, what has come over you? The
world  the world! What do you mean? The world is
where we are and life is what we have here.

At that moment a big fish came up to their house and
greeted her mother, "Hello, what are you arguing
about with your daughter? Arent you going to come
out today?

When she heard her neighbor the little black fishs
mother rushed outside and said to him, How times

have changed! Now children want to teach things to
their parents!

"What's all this about? he asked, puzzled.

"Just imagine what this small fry wants to do, said
her mother, she keeps saying that she wants to go and
see what is happening in the world. What big ideas!

 Ive known you all your life, my girl said her
neighbor to the little black fish, "since when have you
become a scientist and a philosopher and why haven't
you told us about it?

"I dont know what you mean by scientist and philosopher, she replied.

Its just that I've got tired of wandering about and I
don't want to keep on going for boring swims and t0
keep on being happy for no reason until suddenly I
open my eyes and see that, like all of you, I have got
old but am still the same sh and dont know any
more than I did in the first place!

Oh, what silly talk! said the big fish.

Her mother said, I never thought that my only child
would turn out like this! I would like to know which
nasty person has been deceiving her!

No one has been deceiving me, protested the little
black fish, "I have a brain and I can think, I have eyes
and can see....

The big sh turned to her mother and said, "Do you
remember the twisting, turning snail?"
"Yes I do," said her mother, "he used to follow my
daughter around all the time. Oh, how I shall ask God
t0 punish him!

The little black fish was horrified, "Stop, Mummy!
she cried, He was my friend.

"Ive never heard of fish and snails being friends!
retorted her mother.

"Ive never heard of them being enemies," said the
little black fish sadly, "but you people certainly got rid
of him.

Lets forget the past," said their neighbor.

"Well, you brought this up in the first place!" she
replied.

"l wish that we had killed him," muttered her
mother, cant you remember how he used too creep
around all over the place saying all those awful
things.

"Then you should have killed me as well! shouted
the little black fish, Because |ve said just the same
things.

This argument attracted all the other fish. They were
very angry about what the little black fish was saying.
One of the older fish said, "Dont think that we will go
easy on you!"

She needs a clip round the head! said another.

"Go away! said her mother, "Don't you dare touch
my daughter.

One of the fish turned to her mother and said scorn-
fully, See what happens when you dont bring your
children up properly!

The big fish shook his head and said, "lm ashamed
to live in this part of the stream."

Someone else said, Before things get any worse let's
send this little trouble maker after the old snail!"

With this a shoal of fish came up to seize the little
black fish but her friends surrounded her and got her
away to safety in the nick of time. Her mother was
distraught.

"Oh, my God!" she screamed, What shall I do?

"Dont cry for me, Mummy," the little black fish
called back, you should be cning for these miserable
old fish!"

Dont insult us, small fry! shouted one of the old
fish.

Another said, "If you go now and regret it later we
won't let you back." A third cautioned her, saying,
Dont get carried away by your childish day dreams.

"Whats wrong with this place? a fourth wanted to
know.

A fifth fish appealed to her saying, "There is no other
world. The world is here.... Come back!

If you come back now, coaxed a sixth, "we'll really
think that you are a wise little fish.

A seventh agreed, saying, "After all, weve grown
used to seeing you about."

Have pity on me," sobbed her mother, "don't go 
dont go.

But the little black fish had nothing further to say to
them. Some friends of her own age went with her as
far as the waterfall before turning back. As she left
them, she turned and said, "Dont forget me, my
friends, until I see you again.

"How could we?" they chorused, You have shown
us how lazy we have been. You have taught us about
things we had never thought of before. You are a
brave and clever friend and we all look fonvard to
your return.

With a final wave of her tail the little black fish took a
deep breath and shot over the lip of the waterfall. 7

When she recovered her senses at the bottom of the
waterfall the little black fish found herself in a pond. At
first she felt panic at the unusual space, but she soon
began t0 swim about and explore her new surround-
ings. Never before has she seen so much water in one
place. Thousands of what looked like minute fish
where flitting through the water. When they saw her
they laughed and said, "Look at her! What sort 0f
creature is she?

Please dont call me names," said the little black
fish, my name is Little Black Fish. Why don't you tell
me your names so that we can get to know each
other?

One 0f them replied, "We call ourselves the Skim-
mer Fish.

Another added, haughtily, "We are noble and well
bred.

"Nowhere in the world, boasted a third, "can you
find sh as beautiful as us!

A fourth said rudely, Were not as ugly as you are.

She answered, "I'd never have thought that you
would turn out to be so selfish. However I forgive you
because I know that it is only through ignorance that
you talk like that.

All the skimmer fish were horrified, "Do you mean
that we are stupid? they gasped.

The little black fish replied, "If you weren't ignorant
you would know that in this world there are many
creatures whose shapes appear beautiful t0 their own
kind. You don't know what you are talking about.

The skimmer fish were angry because they realized
that she was telling the truth. They thought for a
moment and then said, "From morning till night we
move about all over the place and we never see
anyone else except our parents and sometimes very
tiny worms, which dont count. This is our world."

She replied, "You have never been out of this pond.
How can you talk about the world?"

"But is there any other world than this? they asked.

"The least you could do," she told them, "is wonder

where all this water comes from and whether or not
there are creatures that live out of it.

What do you mean?" asked the skimmer sh in
great surprise, we have never even seen out of the
water! "

The little black fish smiled and wondered what their
mother looked like.

Where is your mother?" She asked.

At that moment a loud croak made her start. She
looked up and saw a frog sitting on a rock. It then
jumped into the pond and swam towards her, saying,
Hello, here I am, what can l do for you?

All the skimmer fish chorused, "Hello, Granny!

The frog said, You troublemaker, what nonsense you
have been talking to my tadpoles? You pompous
upstart! After all, I have lived long enough to know
where the world is; it's right here in this pond. You
had better stop filling their heads with nonsense and
get out of here!

"If you live t0 be a hundred, retorted the little black
fish, "you will still be a poor, stupid old frog!"

And with this she darted away to safety as the frog
swam furiously after her.

The valley became steep and winding. The pace of
the stream increased, and t0 anyone looking down
from the top of the mountain it would have seemed
just like a piece of white string twisting away into the
distance. The little black fish came to a boulder that
had tumbled down the mountain into the stream,
which it now divided neatly in two. On top of the
boulder sat a lizard, the size of a mans palm, sunning
himself in the mid-morning heat, Nearby a large,
round crab was crouched in the sandy shallows eating
a frog which he had just caught. When the little black
fish saw the crab she was frightened, but nonetheless
politely said,

"Hello.

The crab gave her a shifty look and replied, What a
polite little fish. Come here, my dear, come here."

She said, "|m going to see the world, l dont want to
get caught by you!" and carefully kept her distance,

 
The crab coaxed her, saying, Why are you so timid
and upset, my little one?

Im neither timid nor upset she answered, "I just
say what my eyes and ears tell me.

Well, said the crab, "tell me: do your eyes and ears
tell you that Im planning to catch you?

St0p pretending she said scornfully, "I can see what
you're up to."

"Dont be so childish, persisted the crab, you can
see that I hunt frogs; that's because I hate frogs. They
think they're the grandest creatures in the world — I
like to show them who has really got the world in his
claws! Come here, little one. Come on, there is no
reason for you to be afraid.

As he said this the crab started to walk in a curious,
sideways manner towards the little black sh. She
couldn't contain herself and burst out laughing saying,
"You poor thing! You dont even know how to walk
properly. How do you know who holds the world in
his hands?

She kept her distance from him and then a shadow
fell suddenly across the surface of the stream, followed
by a loud splash which sent the crab rolling across the
sand. The lizard laughed so much at this that he nearly
slipped off the boulder into the water. The little black
fish saw a boy standing on the shore, watching both
her and the crab. A flock of sheep and goats appeared
on the bank and dipped their noses into the stream t0
drink. She waited, motionless, until they had finished

and then called to the lizard, E><cuse me, Mr. Lizard,
lm off to find out what lies at the mouth of the
stream. You seem to be a wise creature and I would
like to ask you something.

"What would you like to know? replied the lizard,
kindly.

"When I left home, said the little black fish, many
fish warned me of the danger posed by pelicans,
swordfish and herons. If you know anything about
them, please tell me.

"You wont find swordfish or herons around here,
he answered, "the swordfish live in the sea and herons
are scarce. However, you might find a pelican or two
about. You must be careful that one doesnt trick you
into his pouch.

"What is a pouch? she asked.

"A pelican has a loose bag 0f skin under its neck,
explained the lizard, "in which he can hold a great
deal of water. He can swim and sometimes fish get
swept, unaware, into his pouch. If the pelican isn't
hungry at the time he can keep them stored to eat
later on." The little black fish said, ls there any way
out of this pouch?

 
There is n0 escape, said the lizard, unless the
pouch is torn open. I'll tell you what: I have a knife
that Ill give you. If you do happen to get caught by
one 0f these greedy birds you'll be able to cut your
way to freedom. With this, he scurried into a crack in
the boulder, emerging a few moments later with a
small, ornamental dagger.

Oh, thank you," she said, gratefully taking it, you
are extremely kind. How can I ever repay you?

There is no need to repay me at all, retorted the
lizard, "l have got plenty of these. I make them from
the thorns of bushes that grow hereabouts. I keep
them handy to give to such courageous little fish as
you.

"Have any other fish passed by this way?" asked the
little black fish, very excited.

Many," said the lizard, and now they have grouped
themselves into shoals which drive the fishermen
mad." This rather confused the little black fish and she
asked, E><cuse me, I dont want to seem nosy, but
how do the fish drive the fishermen nmtl?"

"Very cleverly, explained the lizard, "they form up
together and as soon as a fisherman casts his net they
drag it down into the depths." Having said this he put
his ear to another crack in the boulder and excused
himself saying, "Well, I must go now. My children
have woken up.

After the lizard had darted into his lair the little black
fish continued her journey. She kept wondering; did
the stream really flow into the sea, what would hap~
pen if she were caught by a pelican, what sort of beast
was the swordfish that it killed and ate its own kind
and why were herons hostile to her? She swam and
swam, meeting new creatures and learning new things
along the way. She enjoyed jumping and loved to flip
down a waterfall into a lake. Then, swimming near the
surface she saw a deer taking a hasty drink. She
greeted the deer and asked why she was in such a
hurry. The deer explained, "A hunter is following me.
See, he has shot me in the leg..."

The little black fish saw the deer limping and realized

~with a shock that what she said was true. She swam

hurriedly on, passing a turtle basking in the sunshine
on the surface.

 

As the afternoon wore on she found that the valley
was getting wider and wider and the stream was
getting deeper and deeper. She felt very excited; she
hadn't seen so many fish since she had left home.
Several tiny fish gathered around her and said, Youre
a stranger aren't you?"

Yes, I am," she admitted, lve come from a long
way off."

"Where do you want to go?" they asked. "|m going
to find the mouth of the stream, she replied.

Which stream?" said the tiny fish, all at once.

"This stream that we are swimming in, of course!
she told them, with a smile.

"We call this the river, they replied.

The little black fish didnt say anything t0 this and
one of the tiny fish asked, Did you know there's a
pelican about?

"Yes, " she said.

And did you know that it has a big pouch?" asked
another tiny fish.

"Yes, I know that too," she said.

"And yet you still want to continue? asked a third,
incredulously.

Yes," said the little black fish in a determined voice,
"| have to go on."

The word soon spread that a new fish had arrived
who wanted to find the mouth of the river, and was
not afraid of pelicans. The tiny fish that she had first

 
met wanted t0 go with the little black fish, but couldnt
because they feared their parents reaction. Some of
them said t0 her, "We would g0 with you if there
weren't any pelicans, but we are frightened of their
pouches

The little black fish swam on and passed a village 0n
the river bank. Women and children from the village
were washing dishes in the water and she swam on,
listening to their voices fading behind her. By this time
it was getting dark, so she looked for a stone to sleep
under. Shortly she found one that was suitable and
settled down for the night » being tired after her long
journey, it wasnt long before she fell asleep.

At midnight the little black fish awoke to find her
surroundings bathed in the moonlight that reflected
from the surface of the river. She loved the moon: she
remembered those nights when she had wanted to slip
out from under the moss at home and talk to it as the
moonlight shone 0n their house, but her mother had
always pulled her back in and made her g0 back to
sleep. Now she was free; she glided out from under
her stone and said, Hello, pretty Moon."

Hello, Little Black Fish, answered the moon, what
are you doing here?

 
"I'm traveling around the world, she replied.

The moon said, "the world is very big. You wont be
able to go everywhere.

"You're right," she acknowledged, "but lll go as far
as I can.

"I wish I could stay with you until morning, sighed
the moon, "but a big cloud is approaching that will
stop my light.

"Oh, beautiful Moon, said the Little Black Fish, "l
love your light so much. I wish you could shine on me
for ever."

The moon replied, "My dear Little Black Fish, I'm
afraid that I have no light. I can only reflect on to you

what the sun shines onto me. .  And at that moment
a large black cloud covered the moons face and the
little black fish could hear it no longer. Finding herself
alone again in the dark, she was afraid, but collected
herself in a minute 0r two and slipped back under her
stone t0 sleep.

When she awoke the next morning the first thing she
saw was that she had company. A few of the tiny fish
from the day before were whispering t0 each other by
her stone. When they saw she was awake they said,
with one voice, Cood Morning, Little Black Fish!"

Good Morning. I see that you have decided to fo|~
low me after all, she said.

"Yes, replied one of the tiny fish, "but we are still
frightened.

"Thinking 0f pelicans doesnl exactly ease our
minds!" said another.

Y0u all think too much," said the little black fish.
It's no use thinking all the time: if we are to get on
we must have some action."

However, as they began to move off they felt them-
selves to be surrounded. Everything was suddenly
dark: there was no way out. lmmerliately the little
black fish realized that they had been swept into a
pelicans pouch! As calmly as she could she turned to
the tiny fish and said, "My friends, we have been
caught by a pelican, but there is a way to escape."

 

They all began to tiry, and one sohbed, "It is all your
fault, Little Blatk Fish. We all know that there is no
escape from a pelican."

Another added, "He is going to swallow us and that
will he the end of it."

Just then a frightful giggling echoed through the water lt was the pelican latighiitg! Then they heard him
say, "What a lovely catch l have. Honestly, I feel very
sorry for you ~ I don't want t0 swallow you all!

The tiny fish began to beg in earnest for their release,
"Sir," they cried "we have heard such nice things
about you. Please, please he kind and open your beak

to let us go!

The pelican replied, l don't want to swallow you at
the montent. I already have a stomach full 0f delicious
fish just like you!" And, with that, he shook his head
so that they all flowed down t0 the bottom of his
pouch.

"Sir, we l1aven't done anything wrong," implored the
tiny fish, "we're innocent. It was this little black fish
that misled t1s...."

 

"You tiowarr. interrupted the little black fish, "do
you think that this clever hird will let you g0 after such
iaitiftil excuses?"

"You don! know what youre saying, they replied
confidently, "in a minute he will let us go and swallow
you! 


"Yes, boomed the pelican, "l will let you go A but on
one condition."

Whatever your condition, we accept! clamored the
tiny fish.

"lf you wish to win your freedom you must kill this
nosy little black fish!" he said.

Hearing this the little black fish quickly said, "Don't
believe him. All this nasty bird wants to d0 is set us
against each other. But listen, l have a plan."

But the tiny fish were so frightened and eager t0 be
released that they pounced on her. She laughed
scornfully and told them: "You are not strong enough
to kill me, you cowards! You still won't have any
means 0f escape.

We must kill you!" they all shouted. We want our
freedom.

"You must be out 0f your minds," she said, "if you try
to kill me he still won't let you go: don't be taken in by
him!"

"You're only saying this to save your own skin -
you're not thinking of us at all," they answered, re-
doubling their feeble efforts.

Now, listen!" said the little black fish sternly, as she
shook them off, |'ll show you what we can do. Ill
move towards those half dead fish over there, and
she indicated some other fish in the depths of the
pouch, "and pretend that I'm dead. Let's see if the
pelican sets you free then or not. lf you d0nt do as I

 
say l will kill all of you myself with a dagger I have and
cut my own way to freedom!"

One of the tiny fish rushed towards her, saying, "Shut
up, I cant stand you!"

Take this coward away," she said coldly, and waved
her dagger threateningly towards them. Seeing it, the
tiny fish were frightened and began to fight weakly
around her. She then allowed herself to slowly turn
belly up and sank towards the other fish below her. As
she bumped slowly on the bottom of the pouch, her
assailants swam up and shouted to the pelican,
Weve done what you asked, Sir, weve killed the
little black fish! "

"Well done! said the pelican, with a nasty laugh,
"Youve done a wonderful job and now l must give

you your reward." Here he paused, before saying
gleefully, And your reward is that you will all be
swallowed alive!" And with this he gulpetl them all
down!

Seeing this the little black fish whipped out her dag-
ger and slashed a gaping wound along the bottom of
the pelicans pouch. As she fell into the river she heard
his awful screams and the terrible splashing his great
feet made as he pursued her. However, she swam
faster than she ever had before and soon evaded him.

By now it was midday. The little blatk fish swam on
and on and 0n and the river widened into a broad
valley. From right and left small streams joined the
main flow and there was s0 much water that she was
soon lost.

Suddenly she saw a swordfish approaehing, but man~
aged to avoid it and rose to the stirface. Seeing, notha
ing, she dived again and met a group of fish. She
greeted them and said, Excuse me, I'm a stranger
here: lve come a long way. What is the name of this
place?"

One of them replied, "Welcome lo the sea, my
friend." Another said, "This is where all rivers and
streams end, except those that pour into the swamps."
The little black fish was overjoyed with this news. She
said t0 them, "Let me go for a short swim and then I'll
come back and join you. I want to be with you the
next time you drag away the fishermens net!"

Very soon youll get your wish said a fish, but be
careful of the heron: he wont let you go if he gets
you. He doesn't stop bothering us until he catches
three 0r four fish!

After thanking them she left and went swimming.
She rose up near the surface and felt the sun gradually
warming her back. She said t0 herself, | know that
death can come at any moment. As long as I can stay
alive |ll d0 everything in my power to thwart it. Of
course, once death is inevitable it becomes unimportant. What is important is the effect my life, or my
death for that matter, will have 0n others...

But these very thoughts had dulled her alertness and
she never saw the heron that seized her until it was
too late. Struggle as she might she couldnt escape the
beak that was clamped mercilessly around her waist.
The grip was so tight that she felt she would pass out
at any moment. After all, she thought, how long can a
fish survive out of water? She even found herself
wishing that he would swallow her so that the water in
the herons belly would keep her alive a few minutes
longer. With this in mind she said to the heron, Why
don't you swallow me right now? lm the sort of fish
whose body turns poisonous the moment it's dead.

The heron suspected that the little black fish was
trying to trick him. He replied, Youre twing to bluff
me; you want me to open my beak so that you can
escape!"

Land came into sight, and the little black fish realized
that if the heron were to reach it she would be fin-
ished. She said to the bird, "l know youre taking me
for your children to eat; don't you care about them at
all? By the time you land my body will have turned
poisonous."

This made the heron think, and he felt that he should
be more cautious. He answered, "l think you are up t0

something, so |ll eat you myself and catch another
fish for my children.

However, he then noticed that the little black sh
was absolutely still. She seemed dead, and he found
himself in two minds as to whether or not he should
swallow her. He was angry with himself for listening t0
a young fish in the rst place. He decided to ask her if
she was still alive, but as soon as he opened his beak
the little black fish icked her tail and fell down to the
water far below.

Furiously, the heron swooped to follow her. The little
black fish had been out of water for several minutes by
the time she fell into the sea. When she found herself
back below the surface she was barely conscious and
it took her a moment or two to regain her breath.
Sadly, this was too long and the sharp-eyed heron was
onto her in a ash: he plunged beneath the waves,
caught and swallowed her before she knew what had
happened. She suddenly found herself in a dark
humid place with no way out.

 
After a few minutes her eyes got used to the darkness
, and she saw a tiny fish cowering in the corner, weeping and calling for his mother. The little black she went
over to her and said kindly, "Hello, why are you
crying?

Who are you? sobbed the tiny fish, "and what do
you mean? Can't you see that lm dying? Oh, Mother!
I'm finished and can't come with you t0 Lake away the
fishermens net!"

Stop crying," said the little black fish sternly, "you
are a disgrace to all fish. Shame on you!" As the tiny
fish got control of himself she went on, "I want to kill
the heron and free all sh, but I have to get out of his
belly first! "

You are dying yourself, he replied, "how can you
kill the heron?

The little black fish showed him the dagger she still
had, and answered, With this knife. Now, listen
carefully to what I say. When l start wriggling about it
will tickle the heron. When he opens his beak to
laugh, you jump out!

"What about you? asked the tiny fish.

I'm not leaving until I have killed this horrible bird!"
she said.

Having said this she started to wriggle about as much
as she could. Sure enough the heron opened his beak
and the tiny fish was able to leap back into the sea
and swim to safety. He then stopped to wait for the
little black fish, but she never came. Instead, he saw


the heron thrashing in the water, screaming with pain,
Such was the bird's agony that he was unable to fly
and he gradually sank below the surface and drifted
down into the depths, his struggles growing fainter and
fainter, But 0f the little black fish there was no sign."

The old fish finished her story and told her twelve
thousand children and grandchildren to go to bed, but
they all asked, "Granny, what happened to the little
black fish? You havent told us!"

Wait until tomorrow night, was all she said "G0 to
bed, good night, good night."

All the children and grandchildren said good night
and went to bed. The old fish also drifted off to sleep.
But one little red fish couldnt sleep. He lay awake all
night, thinking of the seam.


