The Little Black Fish

IT WAS THE LONGEST NIGHT 0f the winter. At the

bottom of the sea, an old sh had gathered her twelve thou-
sand children and grandchildren around her and was telling
them a story.

Once upon a time there was a little black sh who lived
with his mother in a stream. This stream sprang from the stone
walls of a mountain and ran through the bottom of a valley.

The house of the little sh and his mother was behind a
black stone under a mossy roof. At night they slept together
under the moss. The little sh's heart longed to see, just once,
the moonlight in his house.

From morning till night, the mother and child followed each
other and sometimes mixed in with the other sh. Suddenly
they would dart to some safe place and then they would return.
This was her only child because although the mother had laid
ten thousand eggs only this child had been born healthy.

For a number of days the little sh had been deep in thought
and hadn't said much. Lazily and without interest he swam here
and there and then returned. Most of the time he tagged along
behind his mother. The mother thought that her child was sick
and would soon get well. But something else was upsetting the
little sh

Early one morning before the sun had risen, the little sh
woke up his mother and said, Mother, I want to talk to you.

You want to talk to me now? asked his mother, sleepily.
Save it for later. Wouldr it be better if we Went for a swim
rst?

The little sh said, No, mother. I cant g0 out for swims
any more. I have to leave here.

Do you really have to leave? asked his mother.

The little sh said, Yes, mother. I must go.

But its still so early in the morning, said his mother. Where
do you want to go?

I want to go and see where the stream ends, replied the
little sh. You see, mother, for months now Ive been wonder-
ing where the stream ends and now's the time. I havent been
able to gure it out. From last night till now I havent been
able to shut my eyes and Ive been thinking. Finally, I made
up my mind to go myself and nd the end of the stream. I
want to know about other places and what's going 0n.

His mother laughed. When I was young, she said, I used
to think about these things a Iot, too. But, my dear, a stream
doesnt have a beginning or an end. Its just the way it is. A
stream ows forever and reaches nowhere.

But, mother dear, isnt it so that everything reaches an end?
asked the little sh. The night reaches an end. The day reaches
an end. . . .weeks. . . . .months. . . . years.

His mother stopped him. T ats enough of all this serious
talk, she said. Lets go for a swim. Its time for a swim, not
all this jabber.

The little sh said, No, mother. I'm tired of these swims.
I want to go and see whats going on elsewhere. Maybe you
think someone taught me how to talk like this. I want you to
know that I've been thinking this way for a long time. Of course,
Ive learned a lot about dierent things. For instance, Ive learned
that when they get old, most sh complain about having spent
their life foolishly. They always curse and complain about every-
thing. I want to know if the meaning of life is nothing more

than coming and going from the same old safe places or whether
there's some other way to live in the world.

When the little sh had nished talking his mother said,
My dear child, have you lost your mind? The world! What is
the world? The world is right here where we are. Life is just
what we have.

Iust then a big sh approached their home and said, What
are you arguing about with your child, neighbor? It looks like
you're not planning to go for a swim today.

Hearing the voice of her neighbor, the shs mother went
out of the house and said, What an age its come to. Children
now think that they can teach their mothers.

What's happened? asked her neighbor.

The mother sh said, Listen to the places this half-pint
wants to go. Over and over, he says that hc wants to go and see
what the world is all about. What grown-up talk!

Now listen here! said the neighbor. Since when ha\e you
become such a wise man and a philosopher without letting us
know about it?

The little sh said, Im not sure what you mean by wise
man and philosopher mafam. Im just tired of these swims. I
don't want to continue them and be happy tor no reason and
then all of a sudden open my eyes and nd that, like all oi you,
Ive gotten old and that Im still the same sh with closed eyes
and ears that I was before.

Oh, what are you saying! exclaimed the neighbor.

I never expected my child to tum out like this, said his
mother. I cant imagine what villain has put my baby up to
this.

The little sh said, Nobody has put me up to it. I've got
my own reason and intelligence and I understand. I've got eyes
and I can see.

Sister, do you remember that snail, all twisted up? the
neighbor asked the little shs mother.

Sure, replied his mother. Youre absolutely right. He was
always pushing himself on my baby. What I would like to have
God do to himl

The little sh said, That's enough, mother. Ho was my
friend.

A friendship between a sh and a snail, that}; a new one,
said his mother.

Enmity between a sh and a snail is a new one [or me,
too, said the little sh. Yet you all put his poor head under
the water.

The neighbor said, All this talk is about somcthing thats
in the past.

The little sh said, You brought up the subject yourself.

 
It served him right to be killed, said his mother. Have
you forgotten what things he was saying everywhere he went?

The little sh said, Then kill me, too, because I'm saying
the very same things.

Arguing voices of other sh reached them. The words of the
little sh had made everyone angry. Did you think that we'd
pity you as well? asked one of the old sh.

Another said, He just needs a little box on the ears.

The black shs mother said, Get away, don't you lay a hand
on my child.

Lady, when you don't raise your child as you should, said
another, you have to take what's coming to you.

Their neighbor said, I'm ashamed to he your neighbor.

Let's send him where we sent the old snail before he gets
into trouble, said another.

When they were just about to grab the little sh his friends
snatched him and took him away from the struggle. The black
sh's mother tore at her hair and breast and said, crying, Oh,
my child is leaving me. What can I do? What a curse has befallen mel

The little sh said, Dont cry for me, mother. Cry for those
old sh who remain here.

One of the sh yelled from a distance, Stop scoing, half-pint.

A second said, If you go and then feel sorry, we won't let
you come back.

This is iust childish foolishness. Dont go, said a third.

A fourth asked, What's wrong with this place?

A fth said, There is no other world. This is the world.
Come back.

The little sh no longer had anything to say to them. Some
friends of the same age accompanied him to the waterfall and
returned. When the little sh was some distance away from
them, he said, Friends, I hope to see you again. Don't forget
me.

How could we forget you? replied his friends. You woke
us up from the sleep of a rabbit. You taught us things that we

hadnt even thought of before. We hope to see you again, smart
and true friend.

The little sh came down the waterfall and fell into a pool
full of water. At rst he didnt know where he was. Then he
started swimming and circling around the pool. Up to then,
he had never seen so much water collected in one place. Thou
sands of tadpoles were squirming in the water. When they saw
the little black sh they made fun of him and said, What a
face! What kind of creature are you?

The sh looked them up and down thoroughly and said,
Please don't tease. My name is Little Black Fish. Tell me your
names so well know each other.

One of the tadpoles said, We call each other Tadpole.

Another said, \rVe come from good stock.

Another said, You cant nd any creature more beautiful
than us in the world.

We're not ugly and uncomely like you, said another.

The sh said, I never imagined you would be so proud of
yourselves. That's all right. I excuse you, because you say this
out of ignorance.

Are you calling us ignorant? the tadpoles all said together.

If you weren't ignorant, replied the sh, You would know
that there are many others in the world whose looks are pleasing to themselves. You dont even have names of your Own.

The tadpoles got very angry, but because they saw that the
little sh was right they started over and said, You're knocking
at the wrong door. We roam the world every day from morning
till night, but we never see anyone but ourselves and our
mother and father, except for the little worms, and they don't
count.

The little sh said, But you cant even leave the pool. How
can you talk about travelling the world?

Are you trying to say that there is another world beside
the pool? asked the tadpoles.

At least you should wonder where this water comes from,
replied the little sh, and what else there is outside the water.

The tadpoles said, Outside the water! Wheres that? We've

 
never seen outside the water. . Ha, Ha, Ha. Theyve really
pulled one over on you."

The little sh also started laughing. He thought it would
be better to leave the tadpoles and go on. Then he decided
that it would be a good idea to have a couple of words with
their mother. Where is your mother now? he asked.

Suddenly the deep voice of a frog made him jump. The
frog was sitting on a rock at the edge of the pool. She jumped
into the pool, came up to the sh, and said, Here I am. Did
you want something?

The sh said, Hello, great lady.

Now's the time to make ourselves clear, said the frog. You
have captured some children and are saying very serious things.
I\e lived long enough to knew that this pool is the world. Its
better if you leave and not lead our children astray.

If you were to live a thousand of your lives you would still
be nothing more than an ignorant and helpless frog, said the
sh.

The frog became angry and jumped at the little sh. The
sh ipped quickly and left like lightening, stir-ring up sediment,
slime and little worms at the bottom of the pool.

The valley twisted and curved. The stream had several times
as much water. If one were to look at tlic end of the valley
from the mountains, the stream would seem like a white string.
At one place, a large flat stone had separated from the moun-
tain and had fallen to the bottom of the valley, splitting the
water into two parts. A large lizard, as big as the palm of the
hand, his stomach stuck to the stone, was enjoying the warmth
of the sun and staring at a large round crab. The crab was sit-
ting on the sand at the bottom of the water at a place where
it was shallower and was eating a frog that it had caught. The
little sh's eyes suddenly fell on the crab and he became frightened. He said hello from a distance. The crab looked at him
sideways and said, Vi/hat a polite little sh. Come closer, my
little one. Come here!

The little sh said, I'm o to see the world and I have no
desire to be caught by you.

Why are you so scared and pessimistic, little sh? asked the
crab.

The sh said, I'm neither seared nor pessimistic. I mention
whatever I see and understandf

Very good, said the crab. Tell me what it is you see and
why you think that I want to catch you?

Dont try anything like that on me, replied the sh.

Do you mean the frog? asked the crab. You're being very
childish. I have a grudge against frogs and thats why I hunt
them. You know, they think that they are the only creatures
on earth and that theyre \ery lucky. I want to make them un-
derstand whose hands the world is in. So, don't be afraid my
dear. Come closer. Come!

The crab said these things and little by little began coming
towards the little sh. He walked so strangely that the little
sh couldnt keep himself from laughing and he said, Poor
soul! You don't even know how to walk yet. How could you
know whose hands the world is in?

The little sh drew back from the crab. A cloud fell over
the water and suddenly a blow knocked the crab into the sand.
The lizard laughed so hard at the crabs expression that he
slipped and nearly fell into the water. The crab wasn't able
to pull himself out. The little sh saw a young boy standing
at the waters edge looking at him and the crab. A llock of sheep
and goam approached the water and pushed their muzzles in.
The sounds of baa baa and maa maa lled the valley.

The little sh waited until the sheep and goats had nished
drinking and had left. Then he called to the lizard, saying, My
dear lizard, Yin a little black sh who is off to nd the end of
the stream. I think you are a wise and knowing animal and
for that reason I'd like to ask you something.

The lizard said, Ask anything you like.

They have been frightening me along the way about pelicans, sword sh and sh-eating birds, said the little sh. If
you know anything about them, tell me.

Sword sh and sh-eating biitls aren't found around here,
especially the sword sh who live in the sea, the lizard answered.

But there may be pelicans just down a little further. Be care
ful you dont get fooled by them and go into one of their sacks.

What sack? asked the little sh.

The lizard said, A pelican has a sack under his neck that
holds a lot of water. He swims in the water and sometimes
sh get into his sack and go straight to his stomach without
realizing what happened. Naturally, if the pelican isn't hungry
he stores the sh in his sack and eats them later.

If a sh gets into his sack, doesnt he have any way to es
cape? asked the little sh.

The lizard said, Theres no way out except by tearing the
sack. Ill give you a dagger so if you are caught by a pelican you
can do just that. Whereupon, the lizard crawled into a crack
in the rock and returned with an extIemely ne dagger.

The little sh took the dagger and said, My dear lizard,
you are very kind and I dont know how to thank you.

You dont need to thank me, my dear, replied the lizard.
I have lots of these daggers. When lm not busy, I sit down
and make daggers from the thorns 0f bushes and give them to
smart sh like you.

Have any sh passed by here before me? asked the sh.

Many have passed by, replied the lizard. They have formed
themselves into a school and are driving the shermen crazy.

The little sh said, Im sorry, but one thing leads t0 another.
I hope you won} think Im being meddlesome, but please tell
me how they have driven the shermen crazy.

The lizard said, Well, because they stay together, when the
shermen throw their net they go into the net and drag it along
to the bottom of the sea.

The lizard put his head down to the rock and listened. I'll
have to be leaving now, he said. My children are awake. He
went into the crack in the rock and the little sh had no choice
but to set out again. He asked himself questions over and over.
Lefs see. Does the stream really empty into the sea? If only
the pelican doesn't catch me. I wonder if swordsh really like
to kill and eat their own kind? Why is the sh<eating bird my
enemy?

The little sh swam along and thought. He saw and learned

about new things every stretch of the way. He now enjoyed it
when he fell tumbling down a waterfall and then started swim-
ming again. He felt the warmth of the sun on his back and he
grew strong At one place a gazelle was hurriedly drinking wa-
ter. Hello, beautiful gazelle, said the little sh. Why are you
in such a hurry?

A hunter is chasing me, replied the gazelle. He hit rne
with a bullet . . . right here!

The little sh couldn't See the bullet hole, but from the
way the gazelle limped when he ran, he knew that he was tell
ing the truth.

At one place, turtles were napping in the wannth of the
sun and at another the sound of partridges twisted through the
valley. The smell of mountain grass swelled in the air and mixed
in with the water.

When noon had passed he reached a place where the valley
broadened out and the water went by a grove of trees. The
little sh was really enjoying himself because there was so much
water. He came upon a large number of sh. He hadnt seen
any other sh from the time he had left his mother. Several
tiny sh surrounded him and said, You seem to be a stranger
here.

Yes, I am a stranger, replied the little sh. I come from
very far away.

Where are you going to go? asked the tiny sh.

I'm going to nd the end of the stream, replied the little
sh.

What stream? asked the tiny sh.

The little sh said, This same stream that were swimming

We call this a river, said the tiny sh.

The little sh didn't say anything. 'Dont you know that
the pelican lives along the way? asked one of the tiny sh.

Yes, I know, replied the little sh.

Another asked, Do you also know \vhnt a big \\i(le sack
the pelican has?

I know that, too, replied the little sh.

And you still want to go? the tiny sh asked.

 
Yes, no niatter what, I must g0, said the little sh.

The story quickly got around among the tiny sh that the
little black sh had come from far away and that he wanted to
g0 and nd the end of the river. He wasnt the least bit afraid
of the pelican. Several of the tiny sh were tempted to go with
the black sh, but they didnt say anything because they were
afraid of the older sh. Some said, If it werent for the pelican
we would come along with you. Were afraid of the pelicans
sack.

There was a village on the edge of the river. Women and
children \vcrc washing dishes in the water. The little sh listened to their clatter for a while. He watched the children badling and then left. He went on and on until night fell. He went
under a rock and slept. In the middle of the night he woke
up and saw that the moonlight was falling on the water and
had lit everything up.

The little sh loved the moon very much. On nights when
the moonlight fell on the water the little sh had wanted to
creep out from under the moss and talk to it, but each time
his mother had awakened and pulled him back under the moss
and put him back to sleep.

The little sh went out into the moonlight and said, Hello,
mv beautiful moon.

I Hello, little black sh, replied the moon. What in the heavens are you doing here?

I'm travelling around the world, said the little sh.

The world is very big. You cant travel everywhere, said the
llll.

That doesn't matter, replied the little sh. lll go wherever
l can.

I would have liked to stay here facing you until morning,
said the moon, but a big black cloud is coming towards me
to block of? my light.

'Beautiful moon, replied the sh, l love your light very
much. I would have liked you to always shine on me.

The moon said, The truth is, l don't have my own light.
The sun gives me light and I shine that on earth. Have you


heard that in a few years people plan to i'ly and come land on
me?

Thats impossible! said the little sh.

lts very diicult, replied the moon, but whatever people
want to do. . . . The moon \vasnt able to nish \Vllat it was say"
ing. The black cloud arrived and CO\CIC(l its face. The night
grew dark once again. The little sh was alone. He looked at
the darkness in amazement. Then he crept under a rock and
slept.

He woke up early in the moniing. Over his head he saw
some tiny sh who were chattering with each other. Good morn-
ing, they all said together, as soon as they saw that the black
sh was awake.

The black sh recognized them right away. Coed meniing.
You followed me after all, he said.

~Yes, hut were still afraid, said one of the tiny sh.

Another said, The thought of that pelican wont let us re-
lax.

You worry too much, said the black sh. Ont- shouldnt think
all the time. Let's go. Our fears will leave us completely. ]ust
as they were about to start, the water all about them rosc and
something covered them. ll was dark everywhere and there Ivns
no place to escape. The black sh knew immediately that the}
had been caught in the pelieaus sack. Friends, we have fallen
into the pelicans sack, but the way of escape is not completely
closed to us, he said.

The little sh began crying and begging. Wi- no longer h. c
any way to escape, said one of tlicin. Its all your fault because
you seduced us and led us astray.

He'll swallow all of us and then we're done tor, said air
other.

Frightening laughter suddenly tuistcd through the water. It
was the pelican. What tiny sh I\e caught, he said. Hon
my heart goes out to you. l really dmft want to suallmv you.
Ha, Ha, Ha.

The tiny sh began pleading. Your excellency.  Pelican.
We have heard a great deal about you. Wouldn't you bc so

kind and open your blessed beak a little so we can go out. We
will pray for your blessed being forever.>

The pelican said, I dont want to swallow you right now;
I already have some sh that Fm storing. Look down there!

There were several large and small sh thrown on the bot-
tom of the sack. y

Your excellency, Mr. Pelican, said the tiny sh. We havent
done anything. This little black sh led us astray.

Cowards, said the little sh. Do you think this dishonest
pelican will have mercy? Is that why you're pleading like this?

You don't know what youre talking about, said the tiny
sh. Youll see. Mr. Pelican is going to pardon us and swallow

you.

The pelican said, Sure, Il.l pardon you, but on one condition.

State your condition, sir, said the tiny sh.

Win your freedom by silencing that pesty shl' said the
pelican. 

The little black sh went o to one side and said, Dont
agree! That D'icky pelican wants to set us against each other.
I have a plan.

The tiny sh were so intent on saving themselves that they
thought of nothing else. They began to attack the little black
sh. He was sitting at the back of the sack and he said softly,
Cowards, whatever else happens youve been caught. You have
no way to escape and you arei strong enough to do anything
to me.

We have to strangle you, said the tiny sh. We want our
freedom.

You've lost your senses, replied the black sh. Even if you
strangle me, you won't nd any way to escape. Don't be fooled
by him. 

The tiny sh said, You're saying this to save your own life,
otherwise, you wouldnt think about us at all.

Listen, and lll show you a way, replied the little black
sh. I'll pretend that rm one of the dead sh. Then well see
if the pelican will free you or not. If you dont agree to what

I say Ill kill all of you with this dagger and rip open the sack
and leave while your . . .

One of the tiny sh interrupted him. Thatvs enough, he
said. I cant take any more of this talk. Boo-hoe, Boohoo.

When he saw him start crying, the little black sh said,
Why did you ever bring this mamas baby along with you?
With that he pulled out his dagger and displayed it in front
of the eyes of the tiny sh. Reluctantly, they agreed to do what
the little black sh had suggested. They began to make believe
that they were ghting with each other The little black sh
pretended he was dead while the others went up and said,
Your excellency, Mr. Pelican, we have strangled that pesty black
sh.

The pelican laughed and said, You've done a good job.
Now, in reward for your work, Ym going to swallow you so
you can take a good stroll in my stomach.

The tiny sh never had a chance for, like lightening, they
passed the pelican's throat and were gone. At that moment, the
black sh pulled out his dagger and with one blow opened the
wall of the sack and went out. The pelican ced out from the
pain and smashed his head against the water, but he wasn't
able to go after the little sh.

The little sh went on and on till noon. The mountains
and valley were now gone and the river passed through a level
plain. On the left and right several rivers had joined with it
giving it several times as much water. The little sh was en
joying all the water. Suddenly he noticed that there were no
limits to the water. He went this way and that, but he didn't
reach anything. There was so much water that the little sh
was lost in it. He swam wherever he pleased and still he didn't
reach anything. Suddenly, he saw an enormous long animal cum
ing at him. There was a two edged saw in front of its mouth.
The little sh thought that the swordsh would cut him to
pieces right then and there. He quickly jiunped from the spot
and swam up to the surface of the water. A little while later,
he went under again to look at the bottom. Halt-way, he met
a school of sh-thousands upon thousands of them He said


to one of them, Friend, I'm a stranger. I've come from far

a . Where is this lace? Y
aw The sh called his friends and said, Look here! Heres
another one! Then he turned to the black sh. Friend, welcome to the sea, he said.

All of the rivers and streams empty into here Of course,
some of them go into swamps, said another of the sh.

Another said, You can join our group Whenever you want
to.

The little black sh was happy that he had reached the sea.
He said, Its better if I travel around a little bit rst and then
come and join your group. I want to come along with you the
next time ou uli in the fishermens net. 

You'll get yIdur wish very soon, said one of the sh. Now,
go and take your stroll, but if you go to the surface, be careful
of the heron who isn't afraid of anybody these days. He doesnt
stop bothering us until he has caught ve or six sh a day.

The little black sh left the school and started swunrning. A
little later he came to the surface of the sea. The warm sun
was shining. He felt the burning warmth of the sun on his
back and was delighted. Peaceful and happy, he swam on the
surface of the water and said to himself, Deai could nd me
very easily right now, but as long as I'm able to live I shouldnt
go out to nd death. Of course, if some day I should be forced
to face death . . . which will happen. . . . it doesn't matter. What
is important is what effect my life or death will have on others.

The little sh wasn't able to follow his thoughts and imaginings further than this. The heron came and grabbed him and
carried him off. The little sh kicked and waved in the herons
long beak, but he couldn't free himself. The heron had grabbed
his waist so hard and tight that the little sh was losing all his

strength. When all is said and done, how long can a little sh
stav alive outside the water? The little sh thought that if
onlv the heron would swallow him right away, at least the water
and moisture in his belly would prevent his death for a few
minutes. With these thoughts in mind he said to the heron,
Whv don't vou swallow me alive? Ym one of those sh whose

bodies ll with poison after they die.

The heron said nothing and thought, Aha, a trickster. Whats
up your sleeve? Do you want to get me to talk so you can get
free?

Land came into sight in the distance and got closer and
closer. The black sh thought, If we reach land, I'm done for.
He said, I know you want to take me to your children, but
by the time we reach land I'll be dead and my body will be a
sack of poison. Why don? you have mercy on your children?

It's a good idea to be on the safe side, thought the heron
Illl eat you myself and catch another sh for my children.
New wait a minute, could this be a trick? No, there's nothing
you could do.

While the heron was thinking he noticed that the black sh's
body was limp and still. Does that mean hes dead? he thought
to himself. Now I can't even eat him, myself. I've gone and
spoiled such a soft and delicate sh. With that he called to the
little sh to get him to say something. Hey, little one! Are you
still half alive so I can eat you? He never nished what he
wanted to say because when he opened his mouth the little
sh jumped and started falling. The heron realized that he had
been tricked very badly and started chasing aftcr the little black
sh. The little sh dove through the air like lightening. Thirst
for the sea water had driven him out of his senses and he entrusted his dry mouth to the moist air of thc sea. Iust as he entered the water and took a fresh breath, the heron also arrived
like lightening and this time he grabbcd and swallowed the
little sh so fast that for a moment he didn't realize what bad
luck had overcome him. All he could feel was that it was wet
and dark everywhere and that there was no way out.

The sound of crying came to liim. When his eyes had gotten
used to the darkness, he saw a very tiny sh who had shrunk
into a corner and was calling for its mother. The black sh went
near and said, Little one, get up and try to think about a way
out of this. Why are you crying and asking for your mother?

Who. . . . are you? asked the tiny sh. Can't . . . you . . . see?
lm. . . . dying. . . . going . . . Boo-hoo, Boo-hoe. . . . mommy . . . I . . I cant ever go with you again and carry the sher-mans
net to the bottom of the sea . . . Boo-hoe, Boo-hoof

The little sh said, thats enough, fellow. Youll ruin the
reputation of all sh.

When the tiny sh had nally controlled its crying, the lit-
tle sh said, Tm going to kill this heron and give some peace
of mind to the sh. But rst, lm going to send you out so you
don't ruin everything.

But youre dying yourself, said the tiny sh. How are you
going to kill the heron?

The little sh showed his dagger and said, With this. I'll
rip open his belly. Now listen to what I have to say. Tm going
to start wiggling around and going from this side to that in
order to tickle the heron. When he opens his mouth and starts
giggling, jump out!

What about you? asked the tiny sh.

Dont worry about me, said the little sh. I'm not coming
out until I've killed this meany.

Saying this, the little sh started wiggling and going back
and forth to tickle the heron's belly. The tiny sh stood ready
at the entrance to the stomach. just as the heron opened its
mouth and started giggling, the tiny sh jumped out, fell free,
and a little later splashed into the water. It waited and waited
but it saw no sign of the black sh. Suddenly, it saw the heron
twist and turn and cry out. Then the heron started kicking and
apping. It fell smack into the water where it continued to
kick and ap before it stopped moving. Still there was no sign
of the little black sh, and to this day there hasnt been any
sign of him."

The old sh ended her story. Now it's time for sleep, children. Run along to bed, she said to her twelve thousand children and grandchildren.

But you never told us what happened to that tiny sh,
grandmother, they cried.

We'll leave that for another night, said the old sh. Now
it's time for bed. Good night.

Eleven thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine little sh said
Good night and went off to sleep. The grandmother went to
sleep, too, but as he could, a little red sh just couldn't
get to sleep. All night long he thought about the sea. ...

 


