It was one of those long and chilly winter nights and at the bottom of a brook a very old sh
had gathered all of her l2,000 children and grandchildren around her and was telling them this
story,
Once upon a time there was a little black she who lived in a brook jiust like this one, wlth
his mother. The water that lled the brook came from many small cracks and holes in the rocky
mountalns hngh above, and contmued nts passage to the bottom of the valley.
Behnnd a black rock there was a nuche that looked as a safe shelter, it was covered with lots of
algae at the top whlch could serve as a roof. The Llttle Black Fnsh and his mother hved m thus nlche
and slept there when the nlght came, The Little Black Fnsh had a very secret wl5ll; he wnshed to see
the moonlight if only for once, in the middle of the nlght and msnde their home.
Every day from dawn to dusk the two sh moved back and forth in thls brook followmg each
other. Sometlrnes other shes? Jomed them, and they all swung together at a fast pace in that small
space, gomg back and forth as if they were in a great hurry and they all contmued thxs commgs and
goings until the day was over. The Little Black Flsh was his mother’s only child. She had deposlted
about I0.000 eggs but The Little Black Flsh was the only one among them who had been strong
and healthy enough to survlve.
Lately, for the past few days, The Little Black Fnsh had been deeply absorbed in hls thoughts.
He spoke very httle, moved inside the water wnthout any aspiration and ll’! a careless manner from
one place to another, showlng no lnterest \n anythlng that was happening around him; and most of
the tnme he was Just lagging behmd l1l5 mother. The mother thought maybe her chnld was suck and
she hoped that he would soon feel better. But to tell you the truth, The Little Black sh's rmnd
was occupned by a very wonderful and excntnng plan. 
One early mormng before sunrise The Little Black Flsh woke his mother up and told her: Mom!
I would iike to talk to you.
Come on child, said the mother stall sleepy: this l5 not a good tnme to talk! You can talk to l
me later in the day, rIght now it would be better for us to go out and have a nlce and refreshmg l
swlrn in the water.

No mother, answered The Little Black sh: l cannot contmue these daily swvms any longer.
 

I have made a decusuon and now I am determuned to leave thus place."

Why would you want to leave thus place? Asked the mother very surprused.

Well mother, answered The Luttle Black Fush: "l have made up my mund and am determuned to
leaves"

All rught, saud the mother: but where do you want to go so early un the rnornung?

l want to make an effort, answered The Luttle Black Fush: to venture out and try to fund the
end of thus brook. You know mother, for several months now l have been thunkung a great deal about
thus guestuon and after all the thoughts and speculatuons, I stull have not found any answers Last
nught I could not close my eyes even for one second. l have been thunkung ut over and over agaun,
and funally I have decuded to leave thus place wuth the goal of tryung to fund out for myself where
thus brook ends. My desure us to learn about what us happenung un other places un the world and
how lufe could be elsewhere.

I always had sumular thoughts when l was a chuld." Saud the mother laughung: My dear boy,
there us no begunnung or endung to a brook, Thus us the realuty and everythung that we need to know.
The water always flows, and ut never reaches anywhere.

"But dear mother, saud The Luttle Black Fush: us ut not true that everythung comes to an end?
The nught ends, the day ends, so do the weeks, months and yearsm

l want you to stop babblung bug words, unterrupted the mother: get up and we shall go for
a swum. Rught now ut us tume for us to go on wuth our usual and dauly routune, unstead of those sully
talks that make no sense!"

No mother. saud The Luttle Black Fush: l am tured of these aumless comungs and goungsu l
want to move on, leave thus brook and fund out what us happenung un other places. You may thunk
someone has been puttung these udeas unto my head; but I want to make ut clear that I have been
thunkmg about thus guest for a very long tume, Of course I must admut that I have also learned a few
thungs from others. For example, l know for sure that some shes, when they get old, grumble and
oomplaun that they have wasted theur luves un vaunu They always whune, curse and blame everythung
and everyone around them for havung luved unsuccessfully and to no purpose. l want to be absolutely
sure whether the real meanung of lufe us Just goung back and forth un a small brook untul you get old

or, is there something more? ls there a different way one can live in this big world?"

My child, said the mother, after The Little Black Fish had finished his speech: are you out of
your mind? World! World! What is this idea about the world? The world is right here where we are,
and life everywhere else is exactly the same as we live here.

At this moment a larger fish approached their home and asked: Neighbor, what are you arguing
about with your child? lt seems like you two have no intention of going out for a dip today."

What a horrific time we are living in!" 5aid The Little Black Fish’s mother, coming out of their
home, as soon as she heard the neighbor's voice: Now the children want to teach lessons to
their mothers!

What do you mean?" Asked the hbOf,

Guess where this itsy bitsy brat wants to go! Answered the mother: He keeps saying that
he wants to go and see what is happening in other parts of the world! Some big ideas he has in his
head, strange thoughts so unsuitable for his young age.

Look at me kid. said the neighbor: since when you have become a scientist and a philosopher,
and how come you did not let us know about it?"

Madame! Answered The Little Black Fish: l do not know what you mean by my having become
a scientist and a philosopher, I am simply tired of these continuous and aimless swims. I do not
want to go on living like this, pretending to be happy for very little trivial and unimportant things;
and then suddenly opening my eyes to realize that I have become an old fish Just like most of you,
still the same as l have always been with barely any life experience, wisdom and awareness."

My goodness. cried the neighbor: what a shocking thing to say!

l never imagined, complained the mother: that my only child would turn out to be like
you! l do not know what wicked creature has been putting such dreadful ideas into his head and
corrupting him!

Nobody has been corrupting me, answered The Little Black Fish: l have enough wisdom to
understand many things, and eyes to see for myself!

Dear sister, said the neighbor turning to the mother: "do you remember that snail with a
spiral shell?

You are nght," agreed the mother: "the sna\l was always around my child, may God pumsh
him!

Enough mother! " sald The Little Black Fish: l-le was my frnend.

Frlendshlp between a sh and a snall," answered the mother: whoever has heard such a
thlngl

I have never heard of any hatred and anlmoslty between a sh and a sna\l enther," answered The
Little Black Fish: but you all _io\ned together, teamed up and got rid of that poor creature."

These are all tales of the past. Said the neighbor.

You are the ones, answered The Lnttle Black sh: who brought up the tales of the past.

The snail deserved to be knlled, said the mother: have you forgotten the thmgs he used to
say wherever he went?

Then go ahead and l<ill rne too," answered The Little Black sh: because I am also saymg
slmilar thmgs.

To make a long story short, this argument was loud enough to draw the attention of other shes
in the brook who by now, had all gathered around these three shes:

The Little Black Flsh’s courageous words and the fearless manner in which he was expresslng
his thoughts and ndeas were upsettmg and alarming the whole commumty:

What makes you think we will spare your lnfe? Asked an old sh:

"l'1e deserves a little pumshmentl 5aid another sh.

Move away from hlm, yelled The Llttle Black Fish’s mother as she felt the danger of violence
and hostvllty: do not touch my baby!

"Madame," blamed a third sh: nf you do not educate your child the way you should, you must
face the negatnve consequences!"

l am ashamed of hvmg in your naghborhoocll Declared the newghbor.

We should persuade him, said a fourth sh: "to go and see the old slug and hear some wise
advvce from him before gettnng himself into more trouble

At this moment all the shes trned to catch The Llttle Black F\sh, but his fnends surrounded him
and helped him escape in the rmdst of the commotion.

My Goodness," moaned The Llttle Black Fish’s mother, who was now crylng very hard and
seemed to be gulte helpless: l am gonng to lose my baby, What should I do? I will be rulnedl"

"Mother," sald The Llttle Black Flsh: do not cry for me, cry for those old and hopeless shes
whose llves have been wasted m vam."

Don't you dare to msult us you littie monster!" Shouted a sh from a far dlstance.

"If you leave thls brook, sald a second sh: and then change your mnnd and declde to come
back. we will not allow you to live in our communlty and thls nelghborhood agam!"

These thoughts are temptatlons of the young age, advlsed a thlrd sh: "do not leave!"

"Can you tell us what l5 wrong wlth thus place?" Asked a fourth sh.

There ls no other world besldes thls one." Sald a fth sh: Come back, thls the only world
that exlsts!

If you regann your wlsdom, change your mlnd and stay wlth us, reasoned a sit sh wlth a kmd
and convlnelng tone: then we will belleve that you really are a very nntellngent and mature sh.

We are so used to seelng you every day." sald a seventh sh: and we are really gomg to
mlss you if you leave us.

Have some plty on me," pleaded The Llttle Black Fish’s mother: do not go away, do not leave
mel"

The Llttle Black Flsh dud not have anythlng else to say as he reallzed that the arguments were
leadmg nowhere. He moved away and a couple of frlends hls own age escorted hlm until they
reached the lil:tle waterfall where the brook ended, and returned from that pomt.

My dear fnends, sand The Lnttle Black Flsh before blddlng them goodbye: l hope to see you
agam, do not forget me!

How oan we ever forget you? Announced hls frlends wlth great respect and admlratlon in thelr
tones: You woke us up from our h2F6—lll<63 slumber. Wlth thus declslon and actlon, you told us so
many new thlngs and taught us lessons about WlllCl'I we had never even thought before. We hope
to see you agam our very dear, brave and wlse frlendl"

The Llttle Black Flsh plunged down the waterfall and fell into a pond full of water. At rst he was

a httle confused and scared, but soon he started to move around the pond, He had never seen so
 
much water in one place before. Thousands of tadpoles were flnpplng around the water. As soon
as they notlced The Little Black Flsh, they started to make tun of hum and sald all at once: "Look at
hi5 ugly and dlsgustlng face! What klnd of a creature are you?

"Please do not make lun of me, sand The Little Black Flsh examnnlng them very carefully: my
name l5 The Little Black Flsh. Would you please lntroduce yourselves so that we could get to know
each other?

We eall each other tadpoles. Answered one of them.

"We are descendants of a very hlgh soclal lme and come from old ancestral roots." Added a
second one wlth a lot of prlde in his tone.

No creature on earth l5 more beautlful than us." Bragged a thlrd one.

We are not as ugly and dnsgustlng as you are." 5aid a fourth one wlth great arrogance.

l never lmaglned any creatures to be so snobblsh and selsh. Replled The Little Black Flsh: l
have no problem wlth your sarcastlc remarks about my looks and appearance and the way you are
maklng fun of me. I forglve you because your words are evndence of your lgnorance."

Our lgnorance?" Shouted the tadpoles all at once.

Of course!" Answered The Little Black Flsh: "If you were not lgnorant, you would have known
by now that there are many other creatures in thls world. who mlght look llke me, and also there
are others who do not look llke me, but we all are beautlful each in our own unlgue and preclous
way. You tadpoles, on the other hand, do not even have your own lndlvldual names!"

At rst the tadpoles were very angry at these remarks, but when they reallzed that The Little
Black Flsh was telllng the truth, they changed thelr tone and sald:

"You know what? You are wastlng your tlme and energy for nothmg! We go around the world
from dawn to dusk, but we do not see any other creatures besldes our parents and ourselves. Ol
course there are also the small worms down at the bottom of the water, but they do not count!

"It you cannot leave this pond," asked The Little Black Flsh: "how can you talk about gomg
around the world?

ls there any other world besldes this pond?" Asked the tadpoles.

The least you can do," answered The Little Black Flsh: ls to thlnk about where thls water

comes from, where lt goes to; and what other thlngs could exlst outslde thls water."

What! Outslde thls water?" Asked the tadpoles: We have never seen anythlng beyond thls
water. you must be out of your mlnd" They all laughed together agaln.

The Llttle Black Flsh also felt llke laughlng. He rst thought he would rather leave them alone
and contlnue hls Journey Then he declded that lt mlght be helpful lf he had a few words wlth thelr
mother. He asked them: Where ls your mother now?

5uddenly he was startled by a rough and frlghtenlng volce that sald: l am rlght here

The Llttle Black Flsh saw a blg frog who was slttlng outslde the pond on a rock. Then the frog
Jumped lnto the water, approached The Llttle Black Flsh and asked: What can I do for you?

Hello Lady." Sald The Llttle Black Flsh

Do not play smart wlth me, sald the frog: you are not our equal because you have no
l9€dlQF6€. What makes you thlnk that you can babble blg words to my bables! I have llved long
enough to know that the world ls llmlted to thls pond only, and that ls the fact. Go on wlth your
Journey and do not try to put wrong ldeas lnto my bables heads."

You could have llved a hundred llves, sald The Llttle Black Flsh: llvlng the same way day ln,
day out; and you wlll never be any more than an lgnorant and helpless frog that you are today.

Thls made the frog very angry. 5he leapt to catch The Llttle Black Flsh, who moved rapldly and
hld hlmself among the ponds muddy water and worms; and from there he managed to escape

The rlver snaked ln the valley and the stream had become larger Here the water seemed to be
many tlmes deeper and wlder However, lf someone looked from the top of the mountalns down
lnto the valley, the water would only appear llke a whlte thread. ln one area a large boulder had
fallen oft the mountaln down to the bottom of the valley, dlvldlng the water lnto two branches A
blg llzard the slze of a human palm was stretchlng on her stomach enJoylng the warmth of the sun
The llzard was gazlrlg at a blg red crab slttlng on the sands at the bottom of the water, where lt
was somewhat shallow and he was eatlng a frog he had Just caught. The Llttle Black Flsh suddenly
saw the crab and was scared. He sald hello to hlm, keeplng a safe dlstance away from hlm. The

crab was now looklng at hlm very cautlously and sald: "What a pollte sh, come closer llttle flsh,
come closer!

"l am golng to see the world, answered The LIlZlZlC Black Flsh: and I have no lntentlon of
becommg your next meal.

Come. httle sh, salcl the crab: why are you so susplcnous and scared?

l am nelther susplclous nor scared Sald The Luttle Black Flsh: l only say thlngs that I see
with my own eyes. and follow what my wlsdom tells me."

All nght," sald the crab: would you please tell me what your eyes saw and what your wlsdorn
told you that gave you the wrong lmpresslon I was going to catch you?"

Cut IIZ out. sand The Lnttle Black Flsh: do not play Innocent with me.

Are you talklng about the frog IJust ate? Asked the crab: Come on now, you really sound
llke a chlldl Frogs Just aggravate me, that ls the reason why I catch and eat them. You know what?
These creatures thlnk they are umgue In thus world What makes the matter even worse l5 that they
are not only very proud of themselves, but they seem to be happy about Ill too. lJust want to show
them who ls the master around here! 5o, do not be afrald of me, come forward, come closer!

Havlng sald these words, the crab started walking sldeways towards The Little Black Flsh. l'1e
walked in such a funny way that The Llttle Black Fnsh could not help laughmg You poor creature,"
sald the Llttle Black Flsh to the crab: you stnll have not learned how to walk properly, and you want
to show who the master us?

The Llttle Black Flsh kept a good saie dlstance from the crab At thus moment a shadow
appeared in the water and suddenly a strong blow forced the crab to bury himself Into the sands.
The hzard started to laugh at the sught of the crab She laughed so much that she almost lost
control and was about to fall IﬂllO the water The crab never came up to the surface from under the
sands. Then The Llttle Black Flsh notlced that a Sheppard boy was standlng at the water shore
watchmg hlm and the crab A flock of sheep and goats approached the water and started drmkmg
The valley was fllled with thelr nolses ba,ba,ba

The Llttle Black Flsh wanted untll the sheep and the goats mshed drmkmg and were gone. He
then turned his attentlon to the hzard and sand:

Dear hzard, I am a Llttle Black Fnsh trylng to nd the end of the brook. You look llke a
knowledgeable and wlse creature to me. May I ask you a guestlon?

Sure, answered the llzard: go ahead and ask about everythlng you want to know.

On my way to the end of the brook, sand The Llttle Black Flsh: l have been hearlng frlghtenlng
tales about the pelncan, the swordsh and the seagull. Tell me everythmg you know about these
creatures."

You don’t see much ot the seagull and the swordsh around here, sald the llzard: "the
swordsh llves ln the sea. But the pehcan could be somewhere down below. Be careful about hl5 ',
trlckery; make sure you never fall into his pouch I

"What do you mean by a pouch? Asked The Llttle Black Flsh

The pellcan has a sack under his neck." answered the llzard: whlch can hold plenty of water.
He swlms in the sea and sometlmes shes unknowmgly enter hls pouch and go stralght down his
throat and into his stomach Of course when the pellcan ls not hungry, he would save the shes
inside his pouch and wlll swallow them later."

Do you mean, sand The Little Black Flsh: that once a sh has entered the pelican’s pouch he
has no way out and cannot escape?"

Absolutely! There l5 no way out," sald the llzard: unless a sh makes a hole m the pouch. For
thls purpose l Wlll gnve you a dagger In case the pelican catches you, use it and try to cut his
pouch and escape"

Havmg sand thus, the llzard crawled into the crack of the boulder and came back wlth a very small
dagger. The Llttle Black Flsh took the dagger and sand: Dear hzard, you have been very kmd to
me and you gave me lots of useful lnformatlon and somethmg to use in order to save myself. How
can I thank you?

 My dear sh, sald the llzard: you do not need to thank me I have plenty of those daggers.
Whenever I have some spare tlme, I make them from the thorns that grow on some plants and l glve

them to wlse and lntelllgent shes Just like you V 
Do you mean, asked The Llttle Black Flsh: that other shes have also crossed thls path?
Many have crossed it, answered the hzard: they have now formed a blg group at the sea,

and the shermen are really very annoyed and fed up with them
"Excuse me for talklng so much, sald The Llttle Black Flsh: "but as you very well know. subJects

lead to other sulaJects. If you do not thunk that l am too annoylng would you please tell me how the
shermen are fed up?

You see," explanned the hzard: because the shes are now workvng as a team, they haveJomed
their forces together and are a very strong group. As soon as they get caught 1n a hshermans
net, they pull the net down to the bottom of the sea with all the forces they can gather and save
themselves,

Havmg said this, the lizard put her ear to the crack in the boulder and hstened. "l must go now,
she said: "my babues woke up."

The hzard entered the crack inside the laoulder and The Little Black Fish reluctantly went on his
Journey. But there were guestnons after guestlons that he kept asknng from himselt For example: ls
it really true that the brook nally ends in the sea? What if the pehcan were stronger than me? How
can a swordsh kull and eat other shes that are his own kmd? Why as the seagull our enemy?"

The Little Black Fnsh went on swirnmmg and thmklng. All along the way, mch-lay-mch, he saw
somethmg new or learned somethnng new. Now he enJoyed plunging down the little waterfalls, and
swnmmmg agann when he fell into the water. He could feel the heat of the sun on his back, Wll\Cl'l
gave hum a lot of energy and strength.

ln one area, The Little Black Flsh saw a deer drlnklng water in a great hurry. "Hello, beautnful
deer," said The Little Black Fush: why are you m such a hurry?

The hunter IS rnght laehmd me, sand the deer: he has even shot me on my snde, look. nght
here!

The Little Black Fnsh dld not see the spot where the gunshot had entered, but he saw that the
deer was hmpmg when he started to run away, and he knew the deer was telling the truth. Then he
reached an area where he saw many turtles baskmg in the heat of the sun. ln another area The Little
Black Fush could hear the echo of partrldge sounds comung from the valley. The herbs that grew in
the mountam were producung a pleasant scent that lled the anr and it mnxed with the water. and
the fragrance was penetratmg even msxde the water

ln the afternoon The Little Black Fnsh arrnved at a spot where the valley had broadened and the
water was Flowmg lnside a forest. The water was ialentiful now and The Little Black Fnsh was really

enJoyung ut! He saw many other kunds of shes. He had not seen one sungle sh sunce he had left
hus mother. Now some smaller shes spotted and surrounded hum and asked: "You seem to be a
stranger around here, us ut rught?"

Yes l am a stranger," answered The Luttle Black Fush: I have come from a very far dustance.

Where do you want to go? Asked the smaller shes all at once.

l want to nd the end of thus brook. Answered The Luttle Black Fush.

"What brook? Asked the shes.

Thus one, answered The Luttle Black Fush: "the water un whuch we are all floatung rught now.

We call thus a ruver." Saud a small sh.

The Luttle Black Fush dud not say anythung. Do you know, saud another small sh: that the
pelucan could be somewhere along the way rught now?

Yes l know about that too." Saud The Luttle Black FISH.

You stull are determuned to go further, asked a thurd small sh: even though you know about
all the dangers that are awautung you along thus path?

Yes," answered The Luttle Black Fush: my mund us made up and I am determuned to go no
matter what!

Soon word was spread among other shes that a Luttle Black Fush had come from far, tar away
and was plannung to go and fund the end of the ruver all by hurnself and, most importantly, he was
not afraud of the pelucanl A couple of smaller shes were tempted to Joun The Luttle Black Fush un hus
guest, but they dud not say a word to anyone because they were too afraud of the grown-ups. "We
would have accompanued you," saud some shes: "uf we were not scared of the pelucan but we are
really alraid of bemg caught m hus pouch.

The Luttle Black Fush contunued hus Journey alone. At one spot a vullage appeared on the ruverbank.
The vullage women and gurls were washung clothes and dushes in the water. The Luttle Black Fush
lustened to theur nouses for some whule. l'le also watched the chuldren playung and bathung un the
ruver. Then he left the place; swam, and swam, and swam, untul the nught fell and everywhere became
dark. rle took shelter under a luttle rock and fell asleep. At mudnught he woke up and saw the sulvery
moonlught reflectung un the water and lughtung everythung.

The Llttle Black sh llked the moon very much. Back home when he was wlth his mother,
whenever there was a full moon, he wanted to come out of their home and talk to the moon. But
his mother usually woke up. pulled hum under the algae and made h\m do ndht back to sleep.

Thi5 tlme The Llttle Black sh went to the area from where he could see the reﬂection ol the
moon vn the water and said: Hello my beautIfuI moon."

Hello Little Black sh," said the moon: what brmqs you here?

l want to see the world." 5aid The Little Black sh.

The world is very blq," sald the moon: l am afrald you cannot qo everywhere."

l do not mmd," Sdld The Little Black sh: l Just want to go as far as I possibly can."

l wish I could stay with you until dawn, said the moon: but l see a lng dark cloud commq
towards me whlch Wlll soon block my ght."

"Oh, beautnlul moon," said The Little Black sh: l hke your ght very much. I wish your hqht
could shlne on me for ever."

"Dear sh," sald the moon: as a matter of tact I do not have any lnqht of my own. The sun qwes
me this ght and I reflect it over the earth. By the way. have you heard that humans are planmng
to travel all the way from the earth to land on me?"4

"That is nmpossnalel" Sald The Llttle Black sh.

lt is a very dvtcult Job." said the moon: but human bemgs are capable of dolnq anythmg they
want.

The moon could not nlsh her sentence because a black cloud came over and covered her. Now
the nnqht became very dark. and The Little Black sh was left all alone aqam. For a few mlnutes he
looked around hvm m the darkness but as he could not see anythlnq, he shpped back under a rock
and fell asleep.

lle woke up very early the next mornlng. l-le saw a couple of smaller shes over h\s head
wmsperlnq among themselves. When they saw that The Llttle Black sh was awake, they all spoke
at the same tlme: Good mormng!

Good mornvnq! Sald The Little Black sh recoqmzlnq them rnqht away: You have nally
decided to 10m me m my Journey!"

"Yes," sald one small sh: but we are stlll terrlfled."

We cannot get the thought of the pellcan out of our mlnds, sald another small sh: we are
so frlghtened."

You are thlnklng too much about thus, sald The Llttle Black Flsh: one cannot always thunk
about dangers and negatlve thlngs all the tlmet As soon as we start to go on our way, your fears
and anxletles will completely dlsappear.

All of a sudden and as soon as they started to move forward, the water surroundlng them went
hlgh up, a shadow covered them all, and everywhere became completely dark. There was no way for
them to escape. The Llttle Black Flsh lmmedlately knew that they were caught mslde the pelican’s
pouch.

My frlends, sand The Llttle Black Flsh: we are now caught lnslde the pelicans pouch, but we
cannot totally rule—out the posslblllty of escape!

The smaller flshes started whlnlng and crylngt There IS absolutely no way for us to escape,"
complalned one of them: thls ls all your fault, you trlcked us and COHVIHCCd us to follow you and
now you have put us l'l harm's way."

The pellcan, crled another one: "ls golng to toss us all down hls throat, we are all
flﬂlhdt"

At thls moment they suddenly heard the echo of a very loud laughter m the water. Thus was the
pellcan laughlng at thelr conversatlon and now he addressed them:

What a great catch of littie shes l have gotten here, ha.t.ha.,.ha...l really feel sorry for you!
It l5 hard for me to swallow you all at once, hamhamhau."

The smaller shes started weeplng and begglng. Your Hlghnessl They told the pellcan: We
have heard so many nlce thlngs about you. Would you please do us a great favor and klndly open
your blessed beak and let us go free? We will always be grateful for your klndness and will pray for
you.

"l am not planmng to swallow all of you rlght awayt" Answered the pellcan: l am savlng you for
later because l have other shes reserved in my stomach, You can look down there and see for
yourselves.
Now several big and small fishes could be seen at the bottom of the pelican's stomach. The
smaller fishes said:

Your Highness the Pelican! We have riot done anything wrong, all of us are innocent. The Little
Black Fish tricked us and put us into all this mess."

You cowards, said The Little Black Fish: "do you really believe that this treacherous bird is
full of kindness and compassion? Why are you begging for his mercy and humiliating yourselves like
this?

You do not understand what you are talking about, answered one of the smaller shes: now
you Wlll see for yourself how His Highness will forgive us, set us free and Wlll only swallow you."

Yes? said the pelican: "l Wlll forgive you all, but there is one condition.

"Your Highnessl" Fleaded the smaller fishes: Would you be kind enough and tell us what your
condition is?

lf you kill this wicked sh, responded the pelioan: you will get your freedom back."

"This is a tricld Said The Little Black Fish to the smaller shes while he moved to a corner: "Do
not accept his condition! He is an ewl bird and he wants to turn us all against one another, l have
a plan!"

But the smaller fishes were only thinking about themselves and their own freedom, they did
not even want to hear anything else, and at this moment they all started to attack The Little Black
Fl5l1.

The Little Black Fish moved all the way towards the back part of the pelicarrs pouch and very
quietly told the other shes: "You cowards! You are trapped in his pouch anyway and you have no
way out, besides you are weaker than me and cannot win.

"We must kill you! said the smaller fishes: We want to get our freedom back!"

"You are out of your minds! said The Little Black Fish: "lt will not be possible for you to escape
even after you have killed me. Do not be so naTf ancl do not allow the pelican to play a trick on you
and deceive you!"

"You are saying these kinds of things only to save your own life." said the smaller fishes: and
most definitely you are not a bit concerned about our lives at such a crucial moment when your own

life is in danger!

Listen to me," said the Little Black Fish: l have a plan. I will go down to the place where the
dead fishes are and I will pretend to be dead. We will then see if the pelican sets you free as he
has promised, If you do not accept my suggestion, I will either kill you all with this dagger against
my will, or I will tear the pouch open, escape alone, and you,

Stopf interrupted one of the smaller fishes: enough is enough!" Then he started to cry
Oho...oho,..oho..."

Why did you bring this spoiled little mommy's pet along with you?" Asked The Little Black Fish
when he saw the fish cry like a baby,

At this moment, as the other fishes did not accept his plan, The Little Black Fish was forced to
take his dagger out and hold it in front of the smaller shes’ eyes. Now they had no choice but to
give up and go on with his suggestion. They all staged a ght among themselves, The Little Black
Fish pretended to be dead and the smaller shes went up and told the pelican:

Your Highness! We killed that wicked Little Black Fish,

You did a great Job," answered the pelican laughing: now to reward your good action, I will
swallow you all alive and you can swim inside my stomach for a long time!

The smaller fishes were not given a second chance, the pelican immediately swallowed them and
they all went down his long throat and died.

In the meantime, The Little Black Fish took his dagger, stabbed the pelicans pouch, opened a
small hole in its wall, Jumped out, fell down into the water and escaped. The pelican screamed from
the pain he felt at the hole in his pouch. He submerged his head under the water and made a nal
attempt to catch The Little Black Fish, but he could not find him. 

The Little Black Fish swam, and swam, and swam until it was noon. Now he realized that the river
was not snaking between the mountains and valleys any more. It was flowing inside a smooth and flat
land, Several smaller rivers had Joined it from right and left, making the water many times deeper
and bigger. The Little Black Fish was enjoying the plentiful water, He suddenly stopped, when he
realized that the water had no bottom. He went in all directions, here and there and everywhere.
There was so much water that The Little Black Fish was lost in it! He moved in all directions that

he wanted, and his head did not hit a thing.

Suddenly The Little Black Fish noticed that a huge tall creature was rapidly approaching him
like a thunder, with a two-sided sword in front of his mouth. At this moment The Little Black Fish
thought the swordsh was going to tear him to pieces right then and there. He moved away
quickly. dodged and changed directions real fast with maneuvers that the swordsh could not
follow because of his larger size. After a while The Little Black Fish went up to the water surface
again. l'le waited there for a while, arid feeling the danger was gone, he went down again in order
to nd the bottom of the water. On his way down he saw a school of different and colorful fishes,
thousands and thousands of them; and he asked one of them:

My friend, I am a stranger here. l have come from a very far distance, what is the name of this
place?

Loold The fish called on his friends: Here comes another one...

My friend," he greeted The Little Black Fish: welcome to the seal

All rivers and streams end here. Said another sh: Of course, there are some streams that
Just stand still in one spot. Their fate is obviously very clear, they sink deeper and deeper into the
marshland and disappear.

"You are welcome to Join our team any time you feel like it." Said another fish with a very kind
and convincing tone.

The Little Black Fish was very happy that he had finally made it to the sea.

l would like to swim around for a little while," he said: "see a few things and then l will come
and Join your team. I want to be with you when you drag the fisherman’s net down to the bottom
of the sea."

Your wish Wlll soon be granted! Said one of the shes: Now go ahead and take a swim. But
be very careful about the seagull when you go to the surface of the sea. This creature is not afraid
of anyone nowadays, and he will not give up unless he has wught four or ve of us each day.

At this time The Little Black Fish separated from the school of shes and started to swirn by
himself. A few minutes later he came to the water surface. The sun was reflecting on the water. The
Little Black Fish felt the burning heat of the sun on his back and was enjoying it very much. He was

swimming slowly and happily while he said to himself:

Death can come and get rne easily any minute now! But I should try not to put myself in harms
way as long as I can live. OF course, it is not important if I die, because this is going to happen
anyway. l know my purpose, my purpose is: how will my life or death affect the lives of others.

The Little Black Fish could riot follow his thoughts any further; because a seagull came down,
caught him and flew away. The Little Black Fish was struggling in his long beak, but he could not
save himself The seagull was grabbing him by the belly, holding him very tightly and putting his
life in real danger. Besides, how long can a fish survive outside the water? The Little Black Fish
was hoping that the seagull would swallow him right away; because in this way he could survive a
few minutes longer in the humidity and water in his stomach. With this idea in mind he said to the
seagull:

l suggest that you swallow me alive. Because I am one of those kinds of fishes whose bodies
turn poisonous after they die.

The seagull did not say a word. He thought: Vl/l-iat a clever fish, what kind of trick are you

l planning to play on me? Do you want me to open my beak arid let you escape?

Now the land could be seen on the horizon, getting closer and closer. The Little Black Fish
thought: l must act fast because as soon as we reach the dry land I am finished. He then tried
to play another trick on the seagull and said: Have mercy on your little chicks, because by the
time we reach the land I will be dead and my body Wlll be POISOHOUS. At least think about the lives
of your own chicks.

l must really be careful," thought the seagull: maybe it would be better for me to eat him
myself and catch another fish for my chicks. But vvait a minute, maybe he is tricking me! No, he is
finished by now and I do not think he can do anything any more! 

The seagull was having these thoughts when he realized that The Little Black Fishs body had
become very soft and motionless.

"ls he dead? He thought: Now l cannot even eat him myself, it is a Pity that I wasted such a
tender and slim fish.

Hey you little guy down there! He called on The Little Black Fish and was about to ask him this

guestnon: Are you stlll ahve so that I could eat you?" But before he nished his words, and as soon
as he opened his beak, The Llttle Black Fnsh Jumped off and plunged down towards the water.

Now the seagull reallzed that he had been trlcked. He followed The Llttle Black Fnsh downwards.
The Llttle Black Fnsh was dlvnng m the alr wlth a great speed, only thlnknng about the pleasure of
belng back in the sea. He opened his dry mouth to catch some humldlty comlng from the sea
breeze. As soon as he entered the sea and gulped some water, the seagull caught him at the
speed of lnght. dud not gave him a chance and swallowed him rught away so rapldly that The Luttle
Black Flsh dld not even understand what kmd of trouble he had gotten hlmself lnto, thls time. He
only felt that everywhere was damp and dark, and that there was no way out. He heard someone
crylng. When his eyes got used to the darkness, he saw a very tmy sh suttmg in a corner crylng
and callmg his mother. The Llttle Black Flsh approached him and saud:

"Hey you llttle guy! 5tand up and thlnk about ndnng a solutlon to your problem. There is no use
to cry and call for your mom to come and help you."

Who are you?" Asked the tlny sh: Do you notmseeml ammdymg... oho.,.ol1o...oho...mom,
I cannot come wlth you and drag the sherman’s net down to the bottom of the sea any more.
ohowoho... oho..."

Come on," sald The Llttle Black Flsh: would you stop crymg? Do not be such a coward. You
are an embarrassment and a shame to all generatlons of flshes!

At these words, the tlny sh stopped crymg and The Llttle Black Flsh sand: "l am plannmg to kill
the seagull and set free all of the shes that are trapped in his stomach. But I must save you rst;
otherwlse you mlght rum my plan wlth all the nolse you are makmg.

You are about to due yourself," sald the tlny fnsh: "how are you gomg to kill the seagull?"

The Llttle Black Flsh showed him his small dagger and sald:

l will cut a hole in his stomach wlth thus dagger from msnde. Now llsten to me very carefully. I
will start to move around, left and nght and up and down; to make the seagull feel tlckllsh. As soon
as he opens his mouth to laugh. you are gonng to Jump out."

What about you?" Asked the tmy sh.

Do not worry about me, sald The Llttle Black Flsh: "l Wlll not come out of here untll I will


have kllled thls vlclous blrd.

After these words The Llttle Black Flsh started movlng up and down and left and nght lnslde
the seagulls stomach, tlckllng him As soon as the seagull started to laugh, the tlny sh, readlly
waltlng rlght near hls beak, Jumped out and saved hlmself. Soon he was in the water waltlng for
The Llttle Black Flsh to follow. He wanted and walted for some tlme but The Llttle Black Flsh never
showed up. The tmy flsh suddenly saw the seagull tumbllng and screamlng as he fell unto the seat
The blrd struggled for some whlle, Jumped up and down, and Jlggled untii he dud not move any
more. However. there was stlll no slgn of The Llttle Black Flsh, and there has been no news from
him until this very day...

Here the old sh nlshed her story. She told her 12,000 chnldren and grandchlldren: "Now, it
is tlme for all of you to go to sleep. hurry up!"

The ehlldren and the grandchlldren lnslsted and begged: Please grandma, you stlll have not
told us what happened to the tlny flsh.

l wiil tell you the rest of my story tomorrow night. Sald the old sh: Now l want all of you
to sleep Good nlght.

Ll,999  little black sh sald: "good nlght" and went to sleep. The grandmother also fell asleep.
But there was a Llttle Red Flsh who could not close her eyes even for one second. All through the
night she was thlnking about the seat

