THE LITTLE BLACK FISH

0n a chilly night at the bottom of the sea, the
old fish gathered twelve thousand of his children and
grand-children and began to tell them this story:

"Once upon a time, there was a little black fish
who lived with her mother in a small stream. This
stream was flowing out of the stoney walls of a great
mountain and pouring into the valley below 

The little fish and her mother lived behind a
black rock under a roofing of moss. Every day, all the
day long, the Little Black Fish and her mother strolled
back and forth across their stream Sometimes, they
would chase after one another and sometimes they would
dart through passing schools of fish. They often lost
one another when they did this, but they always found
each other again.

One day the little fish was deeply in thought and
spoke very little. Without joy or interest, she swam
lazily behind her mother. The mother thought that her
daughter was sick and that she'd soon be better. It
never crossed her. mind that the "sickness" of the lit-
tle fish had very special causes.

Early the next morning, before the sun came up, the
little fish woke her mother and said, "Mother, l'd like
to talk to you."

The mother answered, "My dear child, couldn't you
find a better time? We can talk later. Let's go now
and take our stroll."

"No, Mother," the little black fish replied, "I
can't go strolling any more. I'm leaving."

Her mother, still heavy with sleep said, "But where
do you want to go at this hour of the morning?"

The little black fish replied, "l want to go to see
where this stream ends. You know, Mother, for months I
have been thinking about it and after all this tine I
still haven't been able to figure it out. From last
night to now, l haven't been able to close my eyes. l've
done nothing but think. Finally I have decided that l


must find the end of this stream myself. And, of course,
in that way, l will find out what goes on in other places
as well."

Bur the little black fish's mother just looked at
her and laughed. Then she said, "When l was a child l
thought of the same things, my dear. But a stream does
not have an end or a beginning. It is what it is. The
stream is always moving, rolling, flowing, but never
reaches its ending anywhere."

"But after all, Mother," the little black fish answered, "don't you think its true that everything has
an ending? Night and day end. Weeks, months and years.

At this, her mother interrupted her sharply, "Stop
all these nonsensical ideas," she cried. "Let's get up
and go out. Now's the time for having fun, not this
kind of talk."

"No, Mother," said the little fish. "No, l'm fed
up with all the strolling about. l want to go somewhere.
l want to find out what‘s going on, Perhaps you think
someone else has taught me these things but l have been
thinking about them for a long time.

"Of course, I've learned a lot from here and there‘
For example, I have learned that most fish, in their old L
age complain that they have wasted their lives on nothing.
They always are nagging and cursing about everything. 
I'd 1m to know if life really means swimming in a little it.
 place, going back and forth until you are old, or 
if there is some other way you can live in the world ‘I

When the little black fish finished talking her
mother said, "Dear child, are you coming down with a
fever that you speak so foolishly’! World.. world.. world
is where we are living and life is what we haver"

At this time, a neighbor fish who was strolling by
their house called to the little black fish's mother,
"Neighbor, what are you arguing about with your child?
lt seems that you are the one who doesn't want to go
strolling today."

The mother came out of the house as she heard the
neighbor's voice.

"What is happening in this day and age?" the mother
asked. "Now the little children want to teach their
mothers things.

"How's that?" the neighbor inquired.

The little fish's mother said. "Look at this
little pip-squeak. Listen to what she wants to do.
She says she wants to go see what's going on in the
world. What nonsense!"

"Well now, little one," the neighbor said," when
was it that you became a sage and a philosopher and for-
got to let us know about it?"

The little fish said to her, "Madame, I don't
know what you mean by a 'philosopher' or whom you
call a ‘sage’. l only know that I'm tired of all
this strolling about and l don't want to go on with
it any longer. l don't want to grow up and then open
my eyes someday to see that l don‘t know anything more
than when l started out."

The neighbor looked at the little black fish's
mother and cried, "What kind of talk is this?"

The mother fish moaned, "l never would have
thought that my only child would have turned out this
way. What terrible person has poisoned my darling
child's mind?"

"No on has poisoned my mind, Mother," said the
little fish, "hut- l have eyes to see with and a brain
to~ understand with."

Suddenly, tho neighbor said, "Sister, do you remember that twisted old snail?"

"Yes, l do indeed," replied the mother. "He was
always tagging after my dear little child, the devil
take him!" '

"Please, Mother, don't say that," the little fish
cried. "He was my dear friend."

"Well, l never in my life heard that fish could be
*friends with snails," the neighbor said. "They just
aren't our kind of people."

"And l never in my life heard that the snails must
be the enelies of fish. But you people, in your cruelty
chased him out of our village," cried the little black

fish.

To make a long story short, the sound of their
argument brought all the fish of the village to their 
door. The little fish's words angered everyone, for 
no one had ever wanted to leave before.

One old fish asked her, "Do you think we'll be indulgent with you?"

Another said, "She only needs her ears twisted."

But the little black fish's mother cried, "Get
away from my child. Don't touch her. 

Somebody shouted, "Lady, when you don't bring up
your children as you should, you've got to take the con-
sequences!"

The neighbor said solemnly, "l am ashamed to live
next door to you."

Someone else suggested, "Before this thing gets
out of hand, let's take her to the judge."

And so the older fish tried to catch her but her
friends surrounded and led her out of the crowd. As
they were leaving, the mother of the little black fish
was flapping her fins and crying woefully, "Good Lord,
what can l do? l am loosing my little girl."

The little fish called to her, "Mother, don't cry
for me. Cry for these tired, old fish."

"Don't you insult us, you little punk," somebody
shouted.

 "You will see," said another, "before long you
will be dangling on the line of the fisherman and what
a sorry dinner you will make!"

I (For the fishes of the village, like those in all
villages in their stream, were always afraid of the
fisherman. Whenever someone suggested that something
should be done differently, it was said that it was bet-
ter not to do it because it might get the attention of
the fisherman.)

The old fish continued hassling her. One said, "If
You go and regret it later, we won't allow you to come
back.

Another chimed in, "These are the follies of youth,
don't go!"

"What's wrong with right here?" an old fish grumbled.

"There is no other world," shouted another. "The
world is here. Come back."

Somebody else was bargaining with her. "If you come
to your senses and come back then we'll believe that
you are really a very wise little fish indeed."

But the little black fish knew there was nothing
else she could say to them.

Her young friends accompanied her to the waterfall
to see her off on her journey. "Friends, l hope to see
you again," she said at the top of the falls. "Don't

forget me .

"How can we forget you," they answered. "You woke
us from a long sleep. We hope to see you again, too,
courageous friend."

The little fish was carried over the waterfall and
dropped in a pool below. At first she was dizzy but-
after a few moments she regained her balance and began
swimming and strutting around the pool. She had never
seen so much water in one place before. Thousands of
tadpoles were wandering about in the pool. As soon as
they saw the little black fish they began making fun of
her saying, "Look at her shape!" "Look at her shape!"
"What kind of a creature are you?"

The little fish sited them up for a moment and
spoke. "l beg you, don't insult me. My nane is the
little black fish. What are your names‘! Why don't you
tell then so we can be friends?"

One of the tadpoles drifted forward and said, "We
call ourselves tadpoles."

“ Another added, "The keepers of nobility and grace."

Another said, "One cannot find more beautiful creatures than us in this world."

"We are not ugly and misshapen like you are!"

The little fish just stared at them in surprise and

anger. "Where on earth have you gotten such inflated
ideas of yourselves? Never mind, I forgive you because
you are ignorant."

The tadpoles now became very angry also. They
shouted at once, "IGNORANT'!. . .you mean. . .US'!"

"0f course," the little fish continued. "If you
weren't ignorant, you would have known that there are
others in the world who also regard their own shapes as
pleasing."

The tadpoles were furious. They knew that what she
said was true but they didn't want to lose the argument.
They decided to take another approach. One of them began,
“Come now fish, you're getting yourself worked up for
nothing. Why, everyday we tour the world. We stroll
leisurely from one end of it to the other."

"Why yes, of course," another tadpole chimed in,
"and we don't see anyone but ourselves and our parents
except for some very small worms and they don't really
countr"

The little fish was simply astonished! "But you've
never been out of this pond," she cried, "and you talk
about having toured the world?"

"Do we have another world than this one?" the tad-
poles asked.

"Well, at least," the little fish replied, "you
night ask yourselves where all the water that tumbles
into this pool cones from." Then she remembered some-
thing that the kind old snail had told her and added,
"There are other places too, which are outside of water."

"Whit was that?" the tadpoles cried in unison.
(And now they began to laugh wildly.) "You really must
be craty. Where is there such a place, tell us? A
place without water?"

The little fish saw in their faces that she was
fighting a useless battle. She thought to herself, "it
is better to leave the tadpoles and go on. But perhaps
first I could meet their mother."

Suddenly, the groating sound of a frog made her
jump. The frog was sitting on a stone at the side of
the pool. She jumped into the water and swam up to

the little fish.

"l an her," she announced, "what is your pleasure? 
"Hello, grand lady," the little fish said politely.

The fro said "So you have found time to impress
tiny Chlldtelgl with’ your big ideas. Well, you don?t; fool
me, you little beggar. I've lived long enough to now~
that the world is this pond. 'Go on about your own business and stop deceiving my children.

The little black fish replied, But even if you
live one hundred times that you?ve liyed already, you
will not learn anything if you've decided not to listen
to anybody. How can '

But the fro didn't give her time to finish what
she was saying. gShe sprang at the little fish but the
fish was too slippery for her. The little fish slippe
quickly under the water, leaving behind her a gregt
cloud, of mud and worms from the bottom of the pon .

The valle snaked through the mountains and the

little stream grew wider and deeper. The water becgme

» heavy and abundant. But if you were to look from the 
top of the mountains into the valley, the stream appeare
to be nothing more than a white string. At one point,
a big boulder which had coma loose from the mountains,
h'ad fallen into the stream, dividing it into two saris‘;
A good-sized lizzard, about as big as an open han‘, ‘a
glued his belly to the top of the rock and was enioying
the warmth of the sun. Prom there he watched a cra
who was sitting in the sand at the bottom of the wait)? 
eating a frog he had just hunted. When the little ac
fish came into these parts, her eyes fell suddenly
the crab and she became frightened. Keeping her dist-II ,
she nodded to him and said hello. The cr:b looke ‘we
her out of the side of his eye and said, What a p. i
little fish. Cone close little one, come closer.

‘ttle fish answered "l'n going to tour the n
worldeindll don't want at all'to be eaten by you, sir.


To this the crab replied, “But lwhat is there that
frightens such a big girl like you?

 he
"l an not frightened without a good reason, s
said. "But whatever my eyes see and my brain tells le,

my tongue brings out."

"Well now," the crab answered. "Would you please

tell us what is it that your eyes saw and that your brain
told you that made you say that we were going to eat you?"

The little fish nodded toward the frog and said,
"Don't you try to fool me!"

"0h, you mean the frog?" the crab laughed. "Come
now, you are being childish. l have a grudge against
the frogs and that's why I hunt them. They think they
are the only creatures in the world. They're so proud.
l want to take then down a peg or two, to show them who
really has the world in his hands, So you don't have
to be afraid, my dear. Come close, come."

As he finished these words, he began waddling about
on his four legs, moving up closer to the little fish.
His pudgy body looked so funny that, in spite of being
afraid, the little fish began to laugh.

The lizzard was laughing too. lle shouted, "Hey
you, crab, you don't even know how to walk yet. llow do
you know whose hands the world is in?"

As she started to back away, the little fish realized
that a great shadow had fallen across the water. Then
all of a sudden, something long and brown, like a thick
reed, struck the crab and pushed him to the bottom of
the water. He had been pushed so deeply into the sand

floor of the stream that he was stuck in it. llc couldn't
move an inch!

By this time, the lizzard was laughing so bad that
he himself narrowly missed falling into the water.

The little black fish looked up to see a shepherd
girl kneeling by the edge of the water, her staff in one
hand. The shpherd girl smiled down at the little fish
and she smiled hack. A herd of goats and sheep came to
the water's edge and lowered their fates to drink. The
sounds of "Ma-a-a~h, ma-a-a-h" and "Bra-a-h, ba~a-a-h"
filled the valley. The little fish watched in silent
amazement until the goats and sheep drank their water
and left. She had never in her life seen such magnificent creatures.

When the shepherd and her flocks had gone away, the
little fish looked up to the lizzard and said, "Dear
lizzard, i am a little black fish who is going to [ind
the end of this stream. l believe that you are a wise
creature. That's why I'd like to ask you something."

"Go ahead," said the lizzard, "ask anything you
want."

The little fish began, "A wise and kindly snail
once warned me about the pelican and the sword fish and
the seagull. If you know anything about them, please
tell me."

"The sword fish and the seagull are not found in
these parts," the lizzard replied. "Especially the
sword fish who live only in the sea, but the pelican...
he can be found not very far from here. Don't ever be
fooled by him and be swept up in his bag."

"What hag?" the little fish asked.

The lizzard told her that the pelican had a bag _
under his neck which he filled with water. He swims in
the water and sometimes the fish unknowingly go into
this bag, and from there, straight into his stomach.
But, of course, if the pelican isn't hungry, the fish
are left in the bag for later, the lizzard concluded.

"And so if a fish enters the bag, there isn't any
way out?" the little fish asked in a frightened vOice.

The lizzard answered, "There is no way, unless the
bag is torn."

With that, the liuard slipped into a crack in the
rock and came back, almost immediately with a very small
dagger.

He said, "I will give you this dagger. Keep it
with you always so if you fall into the clutches of the
pelican, you can get away."

The little fish tucked the dagger behind her fin
and said, "Dear lizzard, you are very kind. l don't
know how to thank you."

"There is no need for thanks, child," the lizzard
answered. "I have many of these daggers. Whenever I
have nothing to do, I sit down and make one out of the
thorns of plants and give it to a wise fish like you.

"Oh, have any other fish passed this way?" the
little fish asked in surprise.

"Why, yes," said the lizzard. "Many! Now they

have all gotten together in groups and they are giving
the fisherman a very hard time."

The little fish said, "Forgive me, but one question
leads to another. If l am not being too nosy, tell me,
how have they given the fisherman a hard time?“

"By sticking together," the lizzard answered. "As
soon as the fisherman casts his net, they enter it and,
together, they pull the net to the bottom of the sea

Then the liz7ard put his ear to the crack of the
rock and listened for a moment. "l'm leaving now," he
said. "My children are waking up." He turned and disappeared into the crack in the rock.

Again, alone the little black fish was asking her-
self question after question as she swam on her way.

"What if the pelican is stronger than I am," and
"how does the sword fish have the heart to eat its own-)(i
young," and "why is the seagull our enemy?"

She thought as she travelled and every foot of the
way had something new to teach her, something new to be
seen. She now loved to tumble joyously through water- a
falls and to begin to swim again. The feeling of the
sun's warmth on her back gave her a fresh vitality,

At one spot, she saw an antelope drinking water from
the stream in a great hurry.

"Hello, beautiful creature. What's your hurry'!"
she cried.

The hunter has been chasing me," the antelope re-
plied. "Look, he shot me."

rhe'iittie fish couldn't see thw ound but when
she saw the antelope linp away, she knew something terrible had happened to him. '

At another place, she saw nany turtles dozing in
the heat of the sun and at another she heard the laughter
nf partridges echoing in the valley. The smell of noun~
tain grass filled the air and nixed with that of the
water.

1n the afternoon, she reached a place where the
valley widened and the water passed through. The new

depth of the water filled the little fish with happiness. She saw other fish, the first she had seen

since leaving home. Some of the little fish who gathered around her said, "It looks like you are a stranger,
right?"

The little fish answered, "Yes, l am a stranger.
l cone from a long way off."

"Where do you plan to go?" asked one of the tiny

"I'm going to find the end of this stream," said
tho little fish .

"Which stream?" they asked her.

"The one we are swimming in, of course," she
replied.

he tiny fish said, "Oh, we call it a river."
The little black fish said nothing.

 One of the tiny fish asked her, "Do you know that
the pelican is on this route?"

"Yes," she said, "l know".

"Do you know that the pelican has a very big bag?"
they asked.

The little fish replied, "Yes, l know that too."

Another tiny fish asked her, "And, knowing all
this, you still want to go?"

"Yes," she said, "no matter what l must go."

The word spread quickly along the fish in that area
that a little black fish had cone a great distance and
wanted to go to find the and of the river. And that she
wasn't afraid of anything, not even the pelican.

A few of the tiny fish longed to go with her. but
they kept silent for fear of their parents. One of the!
told her, "If it weren't for the pelican, we would surely
cone with you. but we are afraid of his bag."

0n the banks of the river, there was a village.

For a while, the little fish listened to the nois o
the human being and watched their children swimmiieig. 
Then she said good-by to the other fish and went on her
way. She swala and swam until she found herself in the
dark. Then she went to sleep under a stone.

ln the middle of the night, she awoke to see moon—
beans skating across the water making everything bright.
The little fish loved the moon very much. On those
nights when the moon danced on the water at home she
would crawl out from under the moss roof of their house
and speak to the moon. But always her mother got up and
called her back into the house. So she got up and went
to the top of the water. She stood at the rim of the
aoon's reflection and said, "Hello, my beautiful moon."

"Hello, little black fish," said the moon.
Then she said, "I'll touring the world!"

"The world is very large," the moon replied. "You
won't he able to see all of it."

"Well," said the little fish, "I'll go wherever l
can."

Then the moon said, "I'd like very much to stay
with you, but there's a huge black cloud coming towards
ne and he's going to block my light."

"Beautiful noon, I love your light," said the littlo
fish. "I want it always to shine on me."

"My dear young fish," said the noon, "if you want
to know the truth, I don't have any light. The sun gives
me light and l reflect it on the earth. by the way, did
you know that human beings have come to sit on me?"

" utes-but that's impossible!" the little fish
gasped. I 
The moon said, "No, it's only lvery difficult but
these human beings can do anything they set out to do."

The moon couldn't finish what he had to say because
the cloud had covered his face and the night had becone
dark again. The little black fish was left alone. For
a few minutes she stared at the darkness in wonderment.
Then she slipped below the surface of the river, and

went to sleep .

She woke up early the next morning to the sounds
of the tiny fish talking to each other. As soon as
they saw her awake, they said all together, "Good
morning, little black fish."

The little fish recognized them immediately and
replied, "Good norning. So you decided to follow me.“

"Ye " one of them said, "but our fears are still
with us."

Another said, "The thought of the pelican i's still
very distrubing to us."

"You think too much" the black fish said. "You
shouldn't be thinking all the time. Once we get moving
your fears will disappear."

But no sooner had the little fish said this than
they felt the river rise up around them strangely. A
huge canopy came down over their heads. Everywhere was
dark.- No road of escape was open to them. The little
black fish understood immediately that they had been
trapped in the pelican's bag.

"We are trapped in the pelican's bag," she shouted.
"But it isn't hopeless yet."

 The tiny fishes started crying and screaming. One
of them said, "We have no way out and its all your fault.
You are the one that deceived us and led us off the right
path. Now he's going to swallow us and we'll all be done
for."

All of a sudden, the sound of goulish laughter
thundered through the water. The pelican was laughing
and saying, "what tiny fishes I have caught. l feel
truly sorry for you. Ha..ha... I really don't want to
swallow you."

The tiny fishes fell down begging. "Your excellency,
Mr. Pelican, we have heard so lauch about you. lf you
would he so kind as to open your blessed mouth just a
little bit so we can get out, we would be thankful to
your noble being forever."

The pelican said, "l don't want to swallow you right
away. But l have enough fish saved. Look underneath

you ."

A few fish, large and small, lay dead at the bottom
of the hag. The little fish said, "Your excellency,
Mr. Pelican, we have done nothing. We are innocent.
It is this black fish who has deceived us."

The little black fish cried, "You cowards, do you
really believe that this conniving bird will let you go
that you beg him like that?"

“You don't know what you are talking about," they
cried. "You will see in a while how his excellency for-
gives us and swallows you."

Then the pelican said, "Yes, I will forgive you,
but under one condition."

"Surely, just tell us," they answered.

Then the pelican said, "Choke this nosy black fish.
Then you will be freed." no 

The little black fish swam into a corner and said,,
"Don't accept it. This crafty bird wants us to fight
each other. i have a plan..."

But the tiny fish were so concerned about getting
out of the pelican's bag, they would not listen. They
rushed toward the black fish and she retreated farther
into the side of the bag.

"You cowards," she said softly, "you are trapped
anyway. You have no way to escape and you are not big
enough to overwhelm me."

But they shouted back, "We must choke you. We want
our freedom."

"Are you out of your minds?" the little fish cried.
"Even if you choke me you won't be freed. Don't he
fooled by him."

"Listen, l will prove it to you. I will go down
among the dead fishes and pretend that I am dead also.
Then we will see whether he frees you or not." Thou,
drawing the dagger the lizzard had given her, she sn'd,
"Accept what We proposed or l'll kill you with tins
and tear the hag and escape myself.“

"That's enough of your nonsense," one of the tiny

fish wailed. "l can't stand it any longer..boo..hoo..
boo..hoo," he cried uncontrollably.

"Good grief, that's all we need," shouted the 
little fish over his crying, "Why did you bring this
cry baby along?"

Then she held out her dagger and they had no
choice but to accept her plan. They pretended to
fight a while. Then the black fish pretended to be ~
dead. Then the other fish went up and said to the poliean, "Your excellency, Mr. Pelican, we have choked her.
The little black fish is dead."

The pelican laughed and said, "You did a good job.
Now to reward you for your wirk, l will swallow y'ou all
alive, and let you take a good tour of my belly. 
The tiny fish had no time to do anything: Like an
electric current, they passed through the pelican’s
throat.

But the black fish pulled her dagger and with one
blow tore the wall of the bag and escaped through the
hole; The pelican screamed from pain and plunged his
head into the water. But he could not follow the black
fish. She swam and swam without stopping.

Now the mountains and Valley had vanished and the
river was passing through a plain. From left and right
smaller rivers were joining and the waters were becoming
even more deep. The little fish was enjoying‘ this abundance of water when she suddenly came to realize that
the river had no bottom (or at least she couldnt see
one). She swayed this way and that way, without hlttlllg
anything. There was so much water that she was lost in
it. She darted in every direction her heart desired;
still she didn't come up against anything. ~Suddenly,
she saw a long animal swimming toward her like a lightening streak. The sword fish with his double-edged blade.
The little fish thought she would surely be sliced in
half at any second. Only a quick dodge saved her and
she soared to the top of the water.

After a little while she went down again to look
for the bottom, On her way down, she met a school of
fish, thousands and thousands of then. She aSked one
of them, "Friend, l am a stranger. l have cone a long
way. Where am l? 

This fish called to his friends and said, "Look,
another one."

Then he turned to the little black fish and said,


"Friend, you are welcomed to the sea."

Another one said, "All the rivers and streams end
here. 0f course some of them pour into the swamps."

"Any time you like, you can join our group," said
another.

The little black fish was thrilled that she had
reached the sea. She spoke with so much exceitenent that
the other fish laughed at her and asked her to speak
more slowly, Finally, she said, "Before l join your
group, I'd like to look around. And oh, yes, l do want
to be with you the next time you pull the fisherman‘s
net into the seal"

"You will soon have your wish," one of the old fish
said. Go and look around first. But be careful if you
go to the top of the water. The seagull is becoming
quite bold these days. There hasn't been a single day
that he hasn't hunted four or five of us.“

The little fish took leave of the sea fish and
started to swim about on her own. After a bit she came
to the surface of the water. A warm sun was shining
and she felt its burning heat on her back. Softly and
happily she paddled on the surface of the water humming
a song sh had learned in her village. She thought to
herself, "All the streams, and rivers f_low here and make
the sea. Separately, they haven't much strength but
Logether, they are‘ a mighty ocean. In the Same way, all
Qie fish who have hfound the sea starFed out alone and
afraid. llut together they, too, ar'e mighty. l want to
live as long as I can. But even if l die, l will be
happy knowing that my brothers and sisters are together
in the sea. Already they are stronger than the fisher-
man and not matter how many are eaten by the sword fish
and the seagull, there will always be many many others
left to carry on the fight. Some day, when all the courageous little fish in all the little streams of the
world have joined them, they will be so strong that even
their worst enemies will not dare to try to hurt them.
Then all fishes will be truly free."

She was deep into these thoughts when she suddenly
felt herself being swept out of the water. The seagull
had come from behind her and had caughter her in his beak.
She began to struggle wildly to save herself. But it
was useless. The seagull had clamped her waist so hard
that the life was almost squeezed out of her. After
all, how long can a little fish live out of water?


She wished that the seagull would swallow her,
because at least, in the wetness of his belly she might
live a few minutes longer.

"Why don't you swallow me alive?" she asked him.
l'm one of those fish whose dead body becomes poisonous."

The seagull said nothing but thought to himself,
"This little clever one, what is she up to’! She wants
me to start talking so she can escape."

The shore was visible in the distance. They got
closer and closer to it. The little black fish knew
that when they reached the shore she would be done for.
So she said, "I know you want to take me to your babies
but I'll be dead before you get there and what's more,
l'll be just like a bag of poison. You should at least
think of your children."

"Hmm," the seagull though. "Precaution is a good
thing. I'll eat her myself and hunt another fish for
my babies. But, let's see now, could there be some trick
to this?"

He was thinking about these things when he noticed
that the little black fish's body was going limp and‘
motionless. "ls she dead now?" he though. "If she
is, I can't eat her myself anymore. Why have I wasted
such a good fish for no reason!"

So she called to her captive, "Say, little one,
do you still have some life in you so l can eat you
myself. Answer me, l..."

But in the middle of the sentence, the little fish
made a quick jump out of the seagull's moving beak.
She was falling through the air and the seagull was
diving down after her. The little fish opened her
dry little mouth to the wet wind over the water. But
no sooner had she hit the water and caught her breath
than the seagull plunged into the water and, this time
swallowed her so quickly that, for several seconds she
had no idea what was happening to her. She only sensed
that everywhere was damp and dark and that there was.
no way out. There was also a sound; it was the sound
of crying. When her eyes got used to the dark, she
saw a very tiny fish huddled in a corner and crying
for his mother. She went up to him and said, "You
little one, why do you cry and ask for your mother.
Stand up and think of a solution!"

"Who are you, anyway?" asked the tiny fish.
"Can't you see what trouble I'm in? Wa-a-a-h mamma."

The little fish said, "Really, that's quite enough.
Do you want to ruin the reputation of all fishes by
crying so much?"

The tiny fish stopped crying, almost at once. The
little black fish smiled at him and said, "We must kill
the seagull to free every fish from this danger. You
will have to be very brave."

"But we are dying," replied the tiny fish sadly.
“How can we kill the seagull?"

Then the little fish showed him her dagger and told
him she would cut open the seagull‘s stomach from the
inside.

"Now listen carefully," she said. "You must start
running around every which way. That will tickle him
and make it difficult for him to laugh and fly at the
same time." As instructed, the tiny fish started to
tickle the seagull and she began laughing furiously,
so much so that she almost fell into the water. Moun-
while, the little fish begann cutting through the side
of the stomach.

"As soon as l've finished," she cried to her friend,
"you jump out, okay?"

The tiny fish, amazed at how his tickling the sea-
gull had effected the giant bird said, "Okay, but let's
make sure he is done for before we leave!"

Now the little fish had cut a hole big enough for
the tiny fish to escape from. When he ran by her, she
grabbed him and pushed him out. But she herself, continued! stab the seagull. A few seconds later, the
tiny fish was in the water. He waited and waited but
he saw no sign of the little black fish. Then he saw
the seagull twisting and screaming and finally he saw
his legs jerking and he started to fall toward the shore

The tiny fish saw that the seagull did not move 
at all as he fell. He was dead, at last! But there
was still no sign of the little fish.

"And to this day, children," said the old grand-father, "there has been no sign of her." Then he stood
 

up and said to his twelve thousand children and gran-
children, "And now that our story is over, it's time
for all little fish to be in bed‘ Go to sleep now
children."

The children said, "But grandpa, you didn't tell
us what happened to the tiny fish!"

"Good heavens," replied the grandfather. "That's
quite a story in itself We'll leave that for tomorrow
night. Now it's time to sleep. Good night."

Eleven thousand, nine-hundred and ninety-nine
little fish said good night and went to sleep. The
grandmother and grandfather went to sleep also. But
cne little red fish, no matter haw hard he tried, just
couldn't fall asleep. The whole night long, he‘ lay
awake, thinking about the sea.
